https://www.doc88.com/p-39131054311.html

神女賦
A Fu on the Divine Lady
Song Yu
King Xiang of the state Chu, in company with his counselor Song Yu, went on an excursion to the water-side of Yunmeng and bade him to compose a fu on the affair of Gaotang. That night, Yu slept and dreamt of meeting the Divine Lady who was so debonair. Being surprised, he told the king about it the next day. The king asked, "How was thy dream?" Yu replied, "After the middle of yester afternoon,
My senses were confused, I seemed to be glad whereat, As if perturbed, perplexed, I did not know what was that.
Mine eyesight was not so sure,— Now I recall I had seen
A lady on a sudden, — Wonderful was her mien.
I went to sleep and dreamt, Getting, as I woke, no clue Why I was so distressed, — My mood had been so blue.
Then, laying mine hand on the heart and fixing my wits, I saw again what I dreamt. " The king asked, "How did she look like?" Yu replied,
"Beauteous and excelling,
The centre and peak of delight;
Splendent and happily rare, Inscrutable graces her dight.
There was none such of old,
Nor is there any today;
Her ease and elegance,
Praises can never display.
When she came at first, she irradiated like the white sun just up, on the roof beam shining. After a short while, she shone as the bright moon casteth its lighting.
In but a few moments,
Her beauties diffused their sheen;
Flushing like a flower in bloom,
Like gem or pearl was her mien;
Her favours multi-tinged,
It is in vain to write;
When I looked at her closely, Dazzled became mine eyesight.
Her rich dressing embraced brocade, taffeta, tissue variegated and camlet,
Full of gloss and features gay, The acme of vestures fine, In colours of sprightly ray.
She shook her broidered clothes, —
Of garments upper and nether,
The heavier not too short, Nor somewhat long the lighter; Her gait was buoyantly free As to lighten up the hall.
Abruptly she changed her manners, Like a dragon swirling all
Round, hovering in clouds, In such of her raiment fair, In habit light so well meet. Anointed with eupatory unguent, She also spread the scent of pollia sweet.
In nature gentle and bland,
It is good to have her beside; She fared in bearing suave, Any one near, weal betide."
The king said, "Since she was so beautiful, thou mayst as well try to compose a fu on her for me." "Aye, my lord," replied Yu,
"How beauteous is she, the Lady Divine,
Adorned with, of Light and Shade, the occult pith!
Like the bright halcyon flapping its wings, The garb of beau-ideal she is clothed with.
There is no match for her under the sun.
Tip-lop, excellelh she over and above all. With a sleeve would Mao Qiang shadow her face, Knowing she herself would far below fall. Xishi would hide her celebrated visage, For fear she could have no hope of a score. Looked at closely, she is dearly bewitching; Afar, one gazeth at her but to adore.
Her carriage and demeanour inspire wonder, Of a style befitting a sceptred, crowned head, Full to the view of the beholder meek, That wondereth who could share her marriage bed. I was solely glad at heart, Immeasurable in delight;
Being unfamiliar with her, I might feast much my sight. Yet others could not see her, While 1 alone had this right. Her splendour is so gracious; How could it be painted quite? Ample is her face fresh, and soberly fair, Of a complexion gem-like, warmly lucid; The pupils of her eyes like crystals sparkle,
Their luster twinkling with a charm splendid;
Her eye-brows are curved softly, sweetly waving; Her scarlet lips, like minium, brightly shine. In caliber of mind, plain, richly endowed, She is full of candour, broad and mild in line. Keeping herself serene in solitude high, She hustleth yet amongst our mundane kind. A great hall she shouldeth have to live in, For giving freedom and room to her large mind. Crossing the door-step and tinkling her jadestones, Her gentle gait rustleth her tiffany skirts. Casting distant glances at my draperies,
Her look seemeth like a wave raising its crest. Tossing her long sleeves to adjust her gown-fold. She standth demurring as if in wait.
Mild like a rippling stream thoroughly limpid. She is self-possessed and unruffled in trait. Most often placid, seldom with slight stirrings, Her mind could not be sounded to its root.
Her thoughts, seemingly near, reaching yet far, Are supposed to concur, but really stay moot. Lifting my coach curtain to ask for a drive, She wisheth to be obliging in earnest.
With sheer uprightness of heart, pure and clear, Suddenly she differed) from me in test.
Giving good reasons of her view in reply, Her words are scentful like the eupatory. Her spirit cometh and goeth in its flights; Her heart is contented and calm in glory. A soul solitary and unconnected, She fareth alone in a boundless domain. With her aye and promise not yet given, She sometimes heaveth a sigh to plain. Showing slight anger for keeping her pride,
She could not brook infringement and still remain. So then, she shaketh her wearing ornament, Clinketh her phoenix of chalcedony;
Setteth to order her fine array, Changeth her features to gravity; Signaleth at her tutoress, Ordereth her elderly maid for a thing: With the tendrils of joy not conjointed, Thus, she is set upon departing.
Pacing to and fro and turning about, She maycth not be closed with and talked to; About to leave but not yet gone,
She seemeth to regard her white-hoofed colt;
Eyeing askance a little the while, She hath her good will pledged understood. Diverse are her expressions winsome;
I could not depict them all, so good.
Although intent to leave, yet having not broke, She still wisheth to guard from harm and fear. Since it canneth not end ceremoniously, I say, and there is no time to make words clear, Mayeth she allow me a few moments perhaps? The Lady sayeth she must rush along.
I become thereon helpless and defeated, Swept clean off my feet and turned upside down. And then, in a trice, she vanishelh from sight;
I could not find where she is, though hard I try.
The matter is confined to myself alone; Whomsover could I let it be shared by? With streaming eyes and a dismayed, hard struck heart, I search for her up and down till daylight."

高堂賦
A Fu on Gaotang
Song Yu
Years ago king Xiang of Chu took a trip with [his favorite courtiers] Song Yu to the Elevation of Yunmeng. They looked [in the distance] at the Temple of Gaotang, over which just hung a canopy of vapour.
Up and up it did rise;
Suddenly it changed its guise;
Moments but few had flitted by;
Multiplex was its wise.
The king asked Yu, “What vapour is that?” Yu replied, “That is the so-called Morning Clouds.” The king asked, “What is meant by ‘the Morning Clouds’?” Yu said, “Years ago the late king had once taken a trip to Gaotang. Being tired, he took a nap. In his dream he saw a lady, telling him, ‘I am the daughter of the Wu Mountains and now a visitor to Gaotang; having heard that thou hast taken a trip hither, I wish to serve thee upon the pillow and the mat. ‘ The king thereupon favoured her. While leaving, she said, ‘I am in the south of the Wu Mountains and on the pinnacle rock of the highland; at dawn T am the morning clouds and towards sunset I become the showering rain; be it after daybreak or be it before dusk, I am always there below the Southern Elevation’. Latter, when observed early in the morning, she was indeed there as she had said. So a temple was erected for her, named ‘Morning Clouds’. “The king then asked, “When she, the Morning Clouds, appears at first, how does she look like?” Yu answered,” When she first appears, she looks like a
cluster of luxuriant pines upright sheer;
After a short while, she becomes lustrous like a fair damsel,
Raising her long sleeve to shade the glowing sun and show her cheer
To the one in her mind [far beyond that blue fell]
All of a sudden she changes her shape and [gentle] manners,
Turning swiftly into scores of quadrigae and a host of plume-woven banners;
Soon it becomes like cool gusts of wind blowing and cold rain drizzling all around;
And then these would stop and cease and the clouds are nowhere to be found. ”
The king asked, “Could I go there now?” Yu said, “Aye, my lord.” The king then asked, “How would she be like now?” Yu said,
“Oh, high! ah, resplendent! she is;
[hail, yet hail!]
The more ye look at her, the farther she recedes [towering tall];
The wider she expands and arches out in the blue,
The more she dominates and lords it over all.
She changes into anything which belongs to the heaven and [earth]
Or is found in the depths of rivers, lakes and the sea,
Into anything rare and strange, wonderful and magnificent,
You canst not speak of, praise or discuss them amply. ”
The king said, “Try to compose a fu on her for me. ” Yu said, “Aye, my liege.
Take Gaotang all in all, there is nothing whatsoever with it to compare.
For the Wu Mountains have no match, the ways to them intertwine and accumulate.
Rising on the precipices and looking down, one sees the water collected in the huge hollow there
When it turns fair after raining, one overlooks streams converging from a hundred vales late.
The body of water heaves noiselessly as the overflow from all sides feeds it higher and higher still;
The flood swells and grabbles, extending its expanse and volume to wax and fill.
When a gale blows and waves rise, it is like the wondrous rock beds of the Beauteous Islet;
Holding the narrow banks between them yet dashing against one another, they join the ridges high;
Gathering their force and upheaving, they look like Jie-shi seen on the billows.
Gigantic rocks uprooted by water crash each against each and fall, rocking the sky;
Colossal masses clashing the water and sinking, splash aloft with them froths and foams;
The mountain lakelet shaking and whirling, its flowing waves flux far off tossing about;
Their rushing at one another gives out cloudy spray that sends rain-drops big pattering.
Wild beasts, panic-stricken, jump and run wildly, in trampling, tumultuous rout:
Tigers, leopards, chai-wolves and unicorns,
Cowering, lose their voice to roar or yelp;
Buzzards, king pandions, eagles and vultures
Fly up, crouch hidden or escape sans help:
Shivering with fear and holding their breaths,
9
How dare they still be as fierce as of old? Then the denizens of water all appear, South of a small islet in numbers untole: Chelones, tuo-dragons, sturgeons and tunnies, Gather and shoal, skip and romp all at once, Stirring their scales and shaking their fins. Swimming along like serpents and dragons.
Seen distantly from the middle of a slope, Deep woods grow in their winter luxuriance; They send out luster and glory in the sun, Dazzling the eyesight with their brilliance;
Their sheen shoots like darting sparks of the stars, Of which it is vain to describe the radiance.
The forests spread out their tall erect lengths, Covered with dense foliage and flowers; The polycarpous trees hang their ovaries, Bending the boughs downward to form bowers; Their branches wave and the water ripples below, The pictures become blurred and dim anon;
On all sides around the greenery prospers,— It is so benign to be in this verdant throng. Their leaves are full green and ovaries purple, Vermilion trunks they have and peduncles white; Their slender twigs sing sadly in the wind. Like the pipings of the big yu-reeds quite, The clear tones in unison with the heavy, The five variables and the accords four,— These touch the heart and move the ears sorely,
Turn the soft bowels and wound the soul to its core.
The orphan son and the widowed woman,
Hearing this, have their hearts chilled and hopes shorn;
The state official out of his used post,
The virtuous scholar alone and lorn,
Heaving heavy groans and shedding salty drops,
10
Are daily by melancholy thoughts outworn. Climbing higher up and looking far off, One is made sick at heart indeed betimes! Winding round, precipitous, rise the sharp cliffs, Spreading in unprecedented lofty climes.
The immense rocks rise up and run like wild, Slant, stoop, protrude, veer, uplift and let fall;
They stand towering and extend zigzag, Chase one another, then crouch and sprawl; They come together athwart and criss-cross, Or go apart, back to back, as if with gall. Overlapping and aggregated become they, Multiplicate to an astounding state, Till they come to the foot of the Wu Mountains, Where there is a multitude of Giant Pillars Casting looks upward at the tops of these, They are covered with rich herbage one sees, With a couple of rainbows arching on high; Looking back and down, it is so sheer and steep, Empty and profound, infinitely deep, Nothing like the bottom is anywhere nigh: Only the distant roarings of the pines Are heard from the hundreds of heights around. One stands still calmly to inhale and exhale, Fixedly at one spot, unbent and unbound, So that the perspires at his two feet and Feels in body as in mind at ease and sound. Then one becomes suddenly perplexed and lost, The heart is fluttered unwittingly with main,
A strange fear assails from within anon, For in spite of oneself, it would be in vain To quell it though one be brave as Ben and Yu The outcome is the shock at seeing strange things, For it is unknown where they could come from,—
11
Such a big crowd of monstrous devilkins,
As if they were born of spirits weird and wild, Or owe their lives to some wayward godlings, They seem to be [bobbing, bolting, trotting] brutes, Or of the [hopping, bipenate,] feathered tribe, Odd and queer, fantastical and grotesque,
It is impossible in full to describe.
Rising up unto the side of the temple,
One finds the ground level and plane, sans a stone,
The horse-shoe shaped ridge opens its bottom wide, With odorous herbs and trees all overgrown. Autumn eupatories, thymes, coumarous, Thickets of scenting umbellets in full blow, Green kingly quan, purple fleur-de-lis in glory, Jie-che sweet, one and all they bloom and grow. Unbroken, interminate, in a lusty state, The grass-green herbage thrives closely together; The rues spread their perfumes all around them, And birds flock here, of fair songs and fine feather. Some of these, having missed their mates in flight, Are crying sadly for the missed to gather. The constant osprays, the singing orioles, The throstles joyous, the soft plaintive turtle doves, The cuckoos whose cries are like a lone wife’ s, The pheasants of long tail plume nesting above: They chant with sweet harmonious accord, At the prime of their lives, in wanderlust;
They intonate and respond each to the others, As they should in one song and in common gust. With the man of fair parts Xian-mcn Gao Who turned fairy by a mountain brooklet,
And another one, the Yulin Elder,
Who likes to gather grains, to serve at the rites,
Offerings have been given fine and pure,
12
Prayers made in the ruby-decorated hall, To all the deities divine honours paid And homage done the star of the supreme god. When all the prayers are said, all wishes laid, The king leaves ridding in a carriage of jade, A quadriga drawn by four dragonets blue, With oriflammes and hanging flags round about; Then, the streamers flutter in one direction, The chord of strings grows mellifluous and stout, And the note of ya flows with a chilly strain,
So that, as the winds blow past, it sounds mournful. The tune then becomes plaintive and grieving, It catches one ’ s breath and makes one dolefull.
Now, hunters are to be let loose in the wild,
Which, seen afar, is spangled with town walls like stars. The word is said that soldiers should go to hunt,
And they should keep strictly quiet in their tasks.
As yet no arrows have been shot from the bows, But the snares and nets are filled enow soon.
Far and wide has been the crossing of water, As the galloping on the grassy plain boon. The flying race has thus far no time to rise, The hoofed beasts are not yet ready to fleet.
While the chase takes its course slowly or apace, The games are caught before they could retreat.
Those who get the spoils first are preferred for merits, As the carts are already loaded with deers meet.
Thenceforth, when the king wants to visit the temple, He will keep a three-day’ s fast beforehand, Choose his day and moment of departure first.
Select his carriage and dress in sober black, Erect his standards of clouds, rainbow colours
And the cover made of the king-fisher’ s plumes,
When the wind has risen and rain has stopped,
Ere he takes this voyage of a thousand li.
For by clearing the hazy thoughts of the past, Our lord is bound to be keen in wits and sight; He will be anxious for the good of all people; Thus the harms to the state would be set aright; The virtuous and sage would lend timely help;
His nine vents would be free from stoppers that choke, His spirits aware of where the slicking lie: And then, let long life come to him for aye! ”

秋興賦
A Fu on Autumn Feelings
In the fourteenth year of Jin, having attained the age of thirty-two, I begin to find white hairs on my top. As one of the subordinate knights of the Lord of War and at the same time a lieutenant general of the “Warriors of Tigerish Dash”, I serve concurrently as an Imperial Attendant of the Department of Court Affairs. High mansions and pavilion touch the clouds; splendid spectacles shine brilliantly in the sun. Gentlemen wearing coronets decorated with jade cicadae and clothed with taffetas and tiffanies frequent this place. I am a countryman, lying at rest in the past only under a thatched roof and in the luxuriant woods, holding converse formerly but with farmers and tillers of the soil. Taking charge of the official posts to fill up the vacancies, I stand in the ranks of the court; rising early in the morning and retiring late at night, I find no occasion for tranquil repose of heart and mind. It is like fishes in the pond or birds in cages longing for rivers and lakes, marshes and mountains. So I stain my brush and spread paper to compose a fu for giving expression to my thoughts at this time of the autumn, calling it thus Autumn Feelings, which runs like this:
The turnings of the seasons pass speedily, taking place one by one in order; All things shake and avoid one another in ways manifold.
I see the blooms and the sprouts growing in their time, And observe the flourish and decline of things by them told. Feeling the desolation of winter and the richness of spring, I sight at summer’s luxuriance and autumn’s leaves russet and gold. From the humble scholar’s favourable or depressed state, Could be gathered the high or low spirits people in general hold.
Well it is said by Song Yu:
“ Saddening, ah, is the breath of autumn, lonely and astringent;
Shaken by it, grass and woods shed leaves and become enervate;
Grieving and cheerless it is as one leaving for a distant land.
Or one going up hills and down to the water-side to bid adieu, returning late.” For seeing off and returning, trudging and pining for the one who is gone; Embarking on a long voyage, alone among strangers, sad and forlorn;
Standing beside a stream to muse on its flow and grieve over the fleeting of time; And climbing up mounts to yearn for a distant one, and a near one to mourn: These four grievous burdens weigh down heavily people’s hearts, Any single one of which would be hard enough to bear;
The autumnal days of theirs are so laden with sorrows, That no sort of sadness, say, has not become their share. Over the wilds fly the homing swallows;
Above the lowland hovers the marsh falcon
A floating haze rises in the morning;
In the evening drop the leaves fallen.
So then, I lay aside the light fan
And put away clothes of gauzy lawn,
Sit and lie on mats of fine weave
And wear my lined gown.
Trees in my yard rustle and let fall their leaves;
Gusts of winds blow on the curtains with might;
The cicadae sing in a subdued tone in the cool air;
Wild-geese fly in rows southward in flapping flight.
The sky shines more brightly and ever higher does as appear;
The livelong daylight gets shorter every day;
How the dwindling light shortens the daytime!
The cooler night is felt to be much longer in its way.
The moon shines in its luminescent rotundity;
The dews in clear translucence fix the cold of the night sky;
Beams immaculate spread on the steps and doorway;
Crickets sing at the paneled partition in the corridor nearby.
I listen to the morning moans of the departing wild answers,
16
And look at the remaining twinkles of the vanishing Flame.
I stay up all night, unlike others, all alone, Ruminating over a host of things, so diverse, never the same.
1 ponder on the ending of the year and my spent time, Lowering my head feelingly to examine doings of mine; Gray tufts round my ears grow long to signify ashes of the past, Hoary hairs hang down my collar bespeaking decline.
I think of those clever and capable setting aside the rule, Clambering up above the clouds to soar in the sky;
They succeed in rising upon the spring platform of pleasaunce, Pitching their coronets with gold drops and marten tails of the high. If one aims at striking a new path for himself, How could he see the fitness of following suit or otherwise?
I have heard of the excellent way of the supreme man, Who regards all things from heaven to earth as of the same size. Those people have come to know security, forgetting danger, Unaware that they have left life to build their own mound. Being ashamed of what they have been as they are, They think they could be erect without standing on the ground; For side-stepping to get to the spring of a bubbling well, Even a monkey would not play such a poor game;
The tortoise, before he is burnt for lot-casting in a temple, Always wishes to return to the green water wherefrom it came.
So, let me in all solemnity get back home,
Throwing off my official burden to stay aloof, carefree in mind,
To till the rich loam of the eastern upland.
And pay my portion of taxes of corn and millet in kind.
The fountain gushes forth its currents among the rocks;
The chrysanthemums spread their fairness;
I wish to bathe myself in the ripples of the autumnal stream on the hillside and in the meadows,
17
And watch the swift darting, in water, of the white minnows. Thus, I may wander freely by the sides of mountains and rivers, Be at large to do what pleases me in this wide human world, Taking ease to the top of my bent, Passing the end of the year, full well content.
I ponder on the ending of the year and my spent time, Lowering my head feelingly to examine doings of mine; Gray tufts round my ears grow long to signify ashes of the past, Hoary hairs hang down my collar bespeaking decline.
I think of those clever and capable setting aside the rule, Clambering up above the clouds to soar in the sky;
They succeed in rising upon the spring platform of pleasaunce, Pitching their coronets with gold drops and marten tails of the high. If one aims at striking a new path for himself, How could he see the fitness of following suit or otherwise?
I have heard of the excellent way of the supreme man, Who regards all things from heaven to earth as of the same size. Those people have come to know security, forgetting danger, Unaware that they have left life to build their own mound.
Being ashamed of what they have been as they are, They think they could be erect without standing on the ground; For side-stepping to get to the spring of a bubbling well, Even a monkey would not play such a poor game;
The tortoise, before he is burnt for lot-casting in a temple, Always wishes to return to the green water wherefrom it came. So, let me in all solemnity get back home, Throwing off my official burden to stay aloof, carefree in mind, To till the rich loam of the eastern upland,
And pay my portion of taxes of corn and millet in kind.
The fountain gushes forth its currents among the rocks;
The chrysanthemums spread their fairness;
I wish to bathe myself in the ripples of the autumnal stream on the hillside and in the meadows, And watch the swift darting, in water, of the white minnows.
Thus, I may wander freely by the sides of mountains and rivers,
Be at large to do what pleases me in this wide human world,
Taking ease to the top of my bent,
Passing the end of the year, full well content.

洛神賦  王恩保 王約西譯
The Goddess of the Luo
Cao Zhi
In the third year of the Huangchu (1) era, I attended court at the capital and then crossed the Luo River (2) to begin my journey home. Men in olden times used to say that the goddess of the river is named Fufei. Inspired by the example of Song Yu, who described a goddess to the king of Chu, I eventually composed a fu which read:
Leaving the capital
To return to my fief in the east,
Yi Barrier at my back,
Up over Huanyuan,
Passing through Tong Valley,
Crossing Mount Jing;
The sun had already dipped in the west,
The carriage unsteady, the horses fatigued,
And so I halted my rig in the spikenard marshes,
Grazed my team of our at Lichen Fields (3),
Idling a while by Willow Wood (4),
Letting my eyes wander over the Luo.
Then my mood seemed to change, my spirit grew restless;
Suddenly my thoughts had scattered.
I looked down, hardly noticing what was there,
Looked up to see a different sight,
To spy a lovely lady by the slopes of the riverbank.
I took hold of the coachman's arm and asked: "Can you see her? Who could she be - a woman so beautiful!"
The coachmen replied: "I have heard of the goddess of the River Luo, Whose name is Fufei. What you see, my prince — is it not she? But what does she look like? I beg you to tell me!"
And I answered:
Her body soars lightly like a startled swan, Gracefully, like a dragon in flight, In splendor brighter than the autumn chrysanthemum, In bloom more flourishing than the pine in spring;
Dim as the moon mantled in filmy clouds, Restless as snow whirled by the driving wind.
Gaze far off from a distance;
She sparkles like the sun rising from morning mists;
Press closer to examine:
She flames like the lotus flower topping the green wave. In her a balance is struck between plump and frail.
A measured accord between diminutive and tall,
With shoulders shaped as if by carving, Waist narrow as though bound with white cords;
At her slim throat and curving neck
The pale flesh lies open to view,
No scented ointments overlaying it, No coat of leaden powder applied. Cloud-bank coiffure rising steeply,
21
Long eyebrows delicately arched,
Red lips that shed their light abroad,
White teeth gleaming within, Bright eyes skilled at glances, A dimple to round off the base of the cheek — Her rare form wonderfully enchanting, Her manner quiet, her pose demure.
Gentle hearted, broad of mind (5),
She entrances with every word she speaks;
Her robes are of a strangeness seldom seen, Her face and figure live up to her paintings. Wrapped in the soft rustle of a silken garments, She decks herself with flowery earrings of jasper and jade, Gold and kingfisher hairpins adorning her head, Strings of bright pearls to make her body shine.
She treads in figured slippers fashioned for distant wandering, Airy trains of mistlike gauze in tow, Dimmed by the odorous haze of unseen orchids, Pacing uncertainly beside the corner of the hill.
Then suddenly she puts on a freer air, Ready for rambling, for pleasant diversion. To the left planting her colored pennants,
To the right spreading the shade of cassia flags, She dips pale wrists into the holy river's brink, Plucks dark iris from the rippling shallows. My fancy is charmed by her modest beauty, But my heart, uneasy, stirs with distress: Without a skilled go-between to join us in bliss, I must trust these little waves to bear my message. Desiring that my sincerity first of all be known, I undo a girdle-jade to offer as pledge. Ah, the pure trust of that lovely lady, Trained in ritual, acquainted with Odes (6); She holds up a garnet stone to match my gift,
22
Pointing down into the depths to show where we should meet.
Clinging to a lover's passionate faith,
Yet I fear that this spirit may deceive me;
Warned by tales of how Jiaofu (7) was abandoned,
I pause, uncertain and despairing;
Then, stilling such thoughts, I turn a gentler face toward her,
Signaling that for my part I abide by the rules of ritual.
(CPB)
Notes:
(l)the Huangchu: i.e. 222 A.D.
(2)the Luo River: In Henan Province, so are Tong Valley and Mount Jing.
(3)Grazed my team of four at Lichen Field: Orig. — Grazed my horse on a fragrant grass field.
(4)Willow Wood: Name of a place.
(5)broad of mind: Orig. — deportment calm.
(6)with the Odes: Orig. — with poetry.
(7)Jiaofu: A character in a fairy tale who is abandoned by a goddess.

歸去來兮辭 
楊憲益 戴乃迭 ;方重 ; 羅經國
方重 
Come Away Home!
(Prose Preface)
My family being poor, what with plowing and planting we can hardly make both ends meet. There is a houseful of children, and none of the rice jars is provided for a rainy day. No matter how hard I work and learn to be thrifty, I lack the means to procure a decent living. My friends and relatives advised me to enter the local prefecture; though disposed at times to such a move, I could find no proper way of approach.
It happened that the political sky was overcast, the princes rivaling one another in acts of patronage and generosity. My uncle, seeing me in straits, managed to install me as a petty district official. The times were still seething with troubles, and I hesitated to travel too far. About a hundred li from home is the district of Pengtze where the land revenue seemed to be enough for my supply of wine. I agreed to accept this post. But very soon I began to grow disgusted and
24
would think of home-going.
Why? It is just my innate disposition to pursue a more or less natural course of life, and never has it been my pleasure to suit the world against my wishes. Although hunger and cold besiege me, to work in spite of myself would only aggravate my misery. In performing one’s unnatural duties one merely satisfies the mouth and stomach to the cost of personal vitality. I am wont to heave and sign, being deeply ashamed of myself and my unfulfilled aspirations.
Yet, I thought of waiting for the first harvest before I should pick up my things and go. It happened at this time that my sister suddenly died; I could not but rush to her burial. Then I resigned my post and left. From mid-autumn to winter I had managed to stay in office for eighty days or more. Since this acquittal accorded well with my wishes, I wrote the following piece of writing with the happy title, ‘Come Away Home!’ Come away home!
My fields and gardens will be unweeded.
Why not go home?
Ah, foolish me that have sent my soul to bondage;
Why should I pine and be vexed with myself?
I know the past is beyond recall,
But the future is still within my grasp,
I have not wandered far astray;
I feel 1 am back on my right track.
Lightly, lightly floats the boat,
Gently, gently flaps my garment,
I inquire the road of a wayfarer, I resent the dimness before dawn. Then I see the roofs of my home, Joyfully I quicken my steps. The household bid me welcome, And my children are waiting by the wicker-gate. Deserted though the garden-paths, The pine stands, the chrysanthemums bloom.
I lead in my little one by the hand And find the jar full of wine.
With a bottle and cup I freely drink, Smiling, I look at the trees in the front-court,
25
I lean against the southern window to sooth my pride, And feel happy and contented in the narrow room. The garden enriches the soul with my daily visits, Though the garden-gates remain closed all the while. Carrying a staff I wander at ease, Often I look up into the distance.
The careless clouds issue from behind the peaks, And birds, tired of flying, think of coming home. As the veiled sun is going down west, 1 tarry to fondle the lonely pine.
Come away home!
Just bid farewell to the society of men. Since the world and myself cannot agree, What more have I to strive after?
Joy will be found in the hearty talks with my kin, Or delight in music and books that lighten my mind. When the farmers tell me of the arrival of spring, There will be enough to do in the western fields. Driving a covered cart, Rowing a solitary boat, I wind through narrow dales, I climb over rocky hills;
Everywhere the trees burst forth into leafy green, And rivulets gurgle away from their sources.
I see how all objects run their natural rounds, So this life of mine will serve its turn.
Thus let it be!
What earthly journey can last forever?
Why not then let nature take its own course? Whither should we go? Why all the bustling?
I wish not wealth or honour;
And heavenly abodes are beyond my reach.
Let me but embrace every fair day, walking alone, Or put my staff aside to till and weed,
26
Or climb the eastern hill to whistle and sing, Or compose a verse beside the limpid waters. Thus will I ride on the Flux to meet my end, Glad of Heaven’s decree without questioning!

羅經國
Going Home
Going home! The land will soon lie in waste. Why shouldn't I go home? Since I willingly let my mind be enslaved by my worldly desires, Why should I feel remorseful and sad?
Knowing that what I did in the past cannot be redressed,
I can still retrieve my mistakes in the future;
I have not gone too far on the wrong path,
And now I am on the right path of today, not the wrong one of yesterday.
The boat is moving swiftly ahead with the wind blowing on my garment,
I ask the way from a passer-by and feel sad that there is yet only a gleam of early da\ The shabby house is in view in the distance, I run happily towards it.
The boy servant comes forward to welcome me, My youngest son is also waiting for me at the gate. Though the paths in the garden have nearly been decimated, The pine trees and the chrysanthemums are still there. Holding the hand of my child, T walk into the house, There on the table is wine prepared.
I take up the wine vessel and drink alone,
Enjoying the view of the trees in the garden.
I lean against the south window to indulge in my lofty meditations, Contented with the ease of living in a small house.
I find pleasure in walking in the garden every day, Though there is a gate, it is closed all day.
With a staff I roam around, and rest whenever I feel the need, And at times raise my head to look at things in the distance. Clouds drift out aimlessly from behind the mountains, Birds will return to their nests when tired.
It grows dim as the sun sets,
27
I linger, stroking the trunk of the solitary pine tree.
Going home! I will cut off all human relations.
Since the world is at odds with me,
What should I seek by driving out in a carriage?
I will have intimate talks with my kinsmen, And forget my miseries by playing on the harp and reading books. Country folks will come to tell me that spring has come, And that farm work will begin in the western field.
I would either ride on a cart, or row a small boat,
Sometimes following a clear and deep stream that leads me to a valley, Sometimes walking along a rugged and bumpy path that takes me over a hill. Trees are growing boisterously, Spring water is flowing smoothly.
I envy all things that enjoy the blessings of nature And feel miserable that my life will soon be over. Alas! How many more days can I live on this earth? Why not take life as it is?
Why do I worry? What am I aspiring to?
I do not seek wealth and position,
Nor do I desire to live with fairies and gods.
I would go out alone on a fine day,
To cultivate farmland with my staff laid aside.
I would shout aloud on the top of the eastern hill, And compose poems by clear streams.
Welcoming death as part of the vicissitudes of life,
I would be contented with what is willed by Heaven.
What else do I want?
28

東方朔自薦書
Herbert A. Giles
I lost my parents while still a child, and grew up in my elder brother’s home. At twelve I learnt to write and within the year I was well advanced in history and composition. At fifteen, I learnt sword exercise; at sixteen, to repeat the Odes and the Book of History—220,000 words in all. At nineteen, I studied the tactics of Sun Wu, the accoutrements of battle array, and the use of the gong and drum, also 220,000 words in all, making a grand total of 440,000 words. I also carefully laid to heart the sayings of the bold Tzu Lu.
I am now twenty-two years of age. I am nine feet three inches in height. My eyes are like swinging pearls, my teeth like a row of shells. I am as brave as Meng Fen, as prompt as Chi’ing Chi, as pure as Pao Shu, and as devoted as Wei Sheng. I consider myself fit to be a high officer of State; and with my wife in my hand, I await your Majesty’s reply.
Self-Recommendation

酒德頌
孫大雨
Tn Praise of the Quality of Drinking Liu Ling
There is a gentleman of high virtue and the right way Who takes the heaven and earth as of one morning And ten millenniums a mere wink of a day, The sun and the moon his portal and casement And the eight expanses his courtyard and highway. He comes and goes without a track of his vehicle, Puts up in no room or house wherein to stay, Using the sky as his tent and the ground his mat, Doing whatever seeming to him pleasant and gay. When he stops anywhere, he holds his vase and mug; When he moves on, he takes along his beaker and jug; 
Wine is the thing always and uppermost in his mind;
What else does he care for but to finger, of a flagon or a pot the lug? There are grand nobles and princes true blue
As well as courtiers high in rank and untitled celebrities too, Who, hearing of my sough of how he behaves himself, Talk of him and the things he deems fit to do.
Tossing the long sleeves and shaking the collar folds of their gowns, Throwing angry looks left and right and setting their teeth, They preach manners and stand for the regular order, With arguments rife as bristling swords out of sheath.
Just then our good sire is holding his pot to fill from a cistern, Then imbibes at his stoup and parts the settled less from wine, Puffs up his whiskers while squatting upon his hams,
30
Treads the waste dregs but pillows his barm loaves fine. Free from all cumbrous thoughts and nipping cares, Cheerily enjoying his breezy buoyancy under a vine, Now he is overcome with sousing at a sudden stroke, And then, recovering wide-awake, is in spirits divine; He hears not the thunderclaps though listening in quiet, And looking steadily, sees not Tai Shan’s towering majesty in the sunshine; He feels not the furies of burning heat and biting cold, Either the lust of desires, or the greed for gain malign.
He overlooks the ten thousand puddering things of the world
As the Long and the Han Rivers bearing up the tiny “floating disks,” And the two mighty ones waiting on him by the side, As the black bee, carrying on its back the “ming-ling”, that frisks

後出師表
Chu-Ko Kung-ming’s Second Memorial to the Throne on his Expedition
Having considered the fact that the House of Han could not allow the insurgents to live under the same heaven and that its imperial activity ought not be contented with the enjoying of one-sided peace and tranquility, the late emperor instructed your servant to have the insurgents suppressed. His Majesty, though fully aware of your servant’s inability to carry out this instruction, trusted him without hesitation; for the trend of events is that should the rebels not be quelled the imperial destiny would be bound to go to rack, so it would seem far much better to fight against them than succumb to them without resistance.
32
Upon receiving His Majesty’s order, your servant was quite lost in thinking, enjoying no sound sleep and having no good appetite. He was of the opinion that in order to be able to dispatch an expeditionary force to the north, it was essential that matters should first be settled in the south, and he therefore ventured to cross the Lu River in the fifth moon, entering right into the barren
region and setting a dietary limit to himself. It is not that he did not know how to care about himself, but that the imperial dignity should not tolerate the maintenance of one-sided peace in Szechuen; this is where he has endeavored to act upon the late emperor’s instructions, though at his own risk. Such a course of action there are, however, many who are now disposed to criticize or deprecate.
Now the rebels are being engaged in the east and getting exhausted in the west; this is certainly a most propitious time to start a campaign, for taking advantage of the adversary’s misfortunes is a good policy in military tactics. Your servant begs to submit his views as follows:
With the acumen of Kao Ti — which can be likened to the brilliancy of the sun and moon — and with the counsels of his wise advisers, peace and order was not maintained until many difficulties had been surmounted and untold sufferings sustained. Seeing that Your majesty is not such as Kao Ti and Your Majesty’s advisers are not such as Chang Liang and Chen Ping, how is it possible to expect to win, while sitting tight and making no attempt to move? This the first point not understood by your servant.
While holding their respective counties, Liu Yu and Wang Lang always quoted from the sages in discussing the situation and in laying their plans, but they were so prone to suspicion and so easily overwhelmed with fear that they failed to make up their mind to fight year after year, until Sun Tse began to rise and annex the entire territory of Kiangtung. This is the second point not understood by your servant.
Notwithstanding the fact that his resourcefulness was almost superhuman and his proficiency in strategies could favorably be compared with that of Sun Ping and Wu Chi, Ts’ao Ts’ao was once besieged at Nanyang, then escaped narrowly from Wuchao, then suffered seriously at Chilien, and
was finally vehemently pursued at Liyang. At PeisLan he was nearly put to rout; at Tungkwan his escape from death was by a hair-breadth. After all this, he was only able to find himself settling down to enjoy temporary peace. Now in the case of one of much weaker caliber such as your servant, how could settlement be expected without having to go through dangers? This is the third point not understood by your servant?
In his attacks on Changpa on five different occasions Ts’ao Ts’ao was repulsed; in his attempt to cross Lake Chao for four times he met with no success. He employed Li Fu and Li Fu betrayed him; he trusted Hsia How and Hisa How was killed. He was admired by the late emperor for his
33
ability, yet he could not avoid such failures. Then how could one of your servant’s inability be sure of success? This is the fourth point not understood by your servant.
It is only a year since your servant came to Hanchung. During this time, however, generals such as Chao Yun, Yang Chun, Ma Yu, Yen Chih, Ting Li, Pai Show, Liu Ho, Teng Tung, etc., and seventy odd majors and garrison commanders have been dead, together with over a thousand brave generals of foreign birth and well-disciplined cavaliers. 
They were among the best of the elements, not belonging to one district only, but gathered together from various sources in all directions during the last tens of years. If it happens that another few years are allowed to pass without any action being taken, the result will be that two thirds of these elements will have been lost. Then with what will the enemy be attacked? This is the fifth point not understood by your servant.
The people are now impoverished and the military strength is on the wane, yet we cannot afford to rest satisfied with the present condition of affairs. Under the circumstance, it would seem to involve the same amount of energy whether we stand still in the rear or take the offensive at the front. It is, therefore, inexplicable that while few appear to be prepared to take time by the forelock, there are many who are content with the keeping of one district to stand face to face with the rebels. This is the sixth point not understood by your servant.
It may be stated that it is exceedingly difficult to bring the current of events to a standstill. At the time when the late emperor was signally defeated in Hupeh, Ts’ao Ts’ao chuckled with glee at the impression that the situation began to be settled in his favor. But later, when His Majesty threw in his lot with Wu and Yueh in the east acquired Szechuen in the west, and launched a campaign in the north resulting in the killing of Hsia How, it appeared likely that Ts’ao Ts’ao’s plan was doomed to failure, while that of Han was going to be crowned with success. Shortly afterwards, however, Wu broke off its agreement; Kuan Yu lost the day; the late emperor got the worst of it at Tzukuei and Ts’ao Pei assumed the title of emperor. All this goes to show how this course of things is often too uncertain to admit of forecast.
Your servant, therefore, desires to do all he can, even to the last drop of his blood, but without being able to foretell the consequences.



三峽
謝百魁
The Three Gorges
Li Daoyuan
On the banks of the Three Gorges which wind about seven hundred li, there are mountains upon mountains extending in an unbroken chain, with the overlapping cliffs and peaks eclipsing the sunlight. The sun and the moon are invisible except at noon or midnight. At the time when summer floods submerge hillocks, the waterway is blocked to boats going upstream or downstream. But in case when an emperor's edict must be dispatched without delay, a shallop may be sailed from Baidi Town in the morn and arrive at Jiangling at eve, covering a distance of one thousand and two hundred li at a speed exceeding that of a galloping horse or harnessed wind.
Spring and winter are given a particular and delightful charm by the white rapids and green pools with their eddying ripples and their reflections of mountains, or by the fantastically shaped cypresses growing on the summits of peaks or by the hanging cascades flinging sprays between the cliffs, imparting a sense of everything being so limpid and lucid, so lofty and forbidding, yet so lush and thriving.
On the first sunny days and frosty mornings when the woods look chilly and the dells seem sombre and grave, apes are heard to be whining on high, causing a prolonged feeling of disconsolation, and the sound, vibrating in the hollow ravines, only vanishes after a long melancholy echoing. That accounts for the fishermen's song: "The Wu Gorge is the longest of the three in the Ba region's eastern part, three cries of the monkeys bring forth your tears, wetting your sleeves and distressing your heart."


滕王閣序
A Tribute to King Teng’s Tower
Wang Bo
Nanchang, which was the capital of Yuzhang Prefecture during the Han Dynasty, now falls under the jurisdiction of Hongzhou. It straddles the border of the influence of the Ye and Zhen
36
constellations (1), and is adjacent to the Heng and the Lu mountains (2). The three rivers (3) enfold it like the front part of a garment (4) and the five lakes encircle it like a girdle (5). It controls the savage Jing area (6) and connects Ou (7) and Yue (8), and its products are nature’s jewels. The radiance of its legendary sword shoots directly upward between the constellations Niu and Dou (9). Its talented people are outstanding, and the spirit of intelligence pervades the place. This was the place where Xu Ru spent the night on his visit to Chen Fan (10). The mighty Hongzhou spreads out immensely amid the fog, and the intellectual luminaries are as numerous as meteors chasing one another. It borders both the uncultured and the civilized areas, and its host and guests are all prominent people from the East and the South. Under the escort of guard of honor with halberds in their hands, Governor Yan, a man of high repute, comes to attend this
event from afar. Prefect Yuwen (11), a model of virtue, stops his carriage on the way to his new appointment. On this official holiday, which falls on every tenth day, good friends gather together, and a galaxy of distinguished guests from distant places fill the hall. Also present at the gathering are Master Meng , whose literary grace is as imposing as a dragon soaring and a phoenix dancing, and General Wang, who has weapons as sharp as the famous swords “Purple Lightning” and “Blue Frost” in his armory. I, an ignorant boy, have the good fortune to take part in this grand banquet on my journey to visit my father, who is a magistrate of a county.
It is September, the third month of autumn. The puddles on the ground have dried up, and the water in the pond is cool and translucent. At dusk the rays of the setting sun, condensed in the evening haze, turn the mountains purple. In the stately carriages drawn by the horses we make our way ahead, visiting the attractive scenic spot in the mountains. Soon we arrive at the river bank, where the King Teng’s Tower beckons, then we ascend the tower where the fairy once dwelled (12). Ranges upon ranges of green mountain rise as high as the sky. The red glow in the water is the reflection of the richly painted tower that seems hovering in the air. From its heights no land is visible. Circling around are the wild ducks on the sand-bars. Cassia-wood courts and magnolia-wood halls rise and fall like mountain ranges. Pushing open the door carved with decorative patterns, I look down upon endless waves of brightly tinted roof tiles, each elaborately engraved with lovely etchings. A panorama of mountains and plains stretches beneath me, and I am mesmerized by the mighty scene of the winding rivers and big lakes. In the city there are houses everywhere. There are families of great affluence, whose meals are served with many cooking tripods of food and to the accompaniment of music. Massive ships and fierce war vessels are densely moored at the ports. On the sterns of many ships are carved designs of blue birds and
brown dragons. The rain has just let up and the rainbow has vanished. The sunlight shoots through the rosy clouds, and the autumn water is merged with the boundless sky into one hue. The
37
fishermen can be heard singing the evening songs, their voices drifting as far as the banks of the Poyang Lake. Even the wild geese feel the chill of dusk settling upon them, and they cry all the way while flying southward, disappearing around the south bend of the Heng Mountain.
Looking afar and chanting, and then looking downward and singing, I feel a sudden rush of ecstasy soaring up in me. The music of the panpipe is like a gentle cool breeze. The soft singing lingers on; it is so soothing that even the passing white clouds seem to come to a halt. The gathering here can be compared to the banquet in the bamboo garden hosted by Prince of Xiao of the Liang State (13), and many a guest is a greater drinker than Tao Yuanming (14). It is also like the feast at River Ye where Cao Zhi (15) composed the poem in praise of the lotus flower. Present are many talented scholars who are as gifted as Xie lingyun of Linchuan (16). It is not an easy
thing to have four excellent things all at once, that is, good weather, beautiful scenery, full enjoyment and heartfelt happiness, and it is even more difficult to have a generous host and honored guests. I look into the vast expanse of the sky and amuse myself to my heart’s content on this festive day. The sky is high and the land is boundless; I cannot but feel the immensity of the universe. Sadness follows happiness. I am aware that success and failure are predestined. I look into the distance, but Chang’an, the capital of the country, is far beyond the setting sun in the west, and Wuhui (17) is unapproachable somewhere amid the clouds. At the farthest end of the south are the depths of the South Sea, and far away in the north is the pillar that upholds the sky, but the Polestar is still farther. Since the mountains and passes are hard to travel over, who would sympathize with the disappointed ones? The people I meet here are all politically frustrated, drifting together like duckweeds. I pine for the Emperor but am not summoned. How long should I wait before I am called to the court again like Jia Yi (18)?
Alas! I am ill fated, and my life is full of frustrations. Feng tang grew old quickly (19) and Li Guang had difficulty getting promoted (20). Jia Yi was unjustly exiled to Changsha. Was it because there was no wise emperor on the throne? Liang Hong had to seek refuge at the seaside (21). Was it because there was no good government in his time? Fortunately what supports one is the belief that a man of noble character always contented with his lot. Old as one is, he gains vigor with age and by no means wavers in his aspiration. Poor as one is, he is all the more determined in adversity and by no means gives up his ambition. One keeps his integrity even if he has drunk the water of the spring of Avarice (22) and is cheerful even is he is confronted with misfortune. Though the North Sea is far away, one can still get there with the help of the strong wind. Though the morning is gone, it is not too late to make up the loss in the evening. Meng Chang was noble
and honest, but his devotion to the country was futile (23). Ruan Ji was unruly and untrammclcd, but he burst out crying when in dire straits (24). How can we learn from him?
38
I am an insignificant scholar of a low official position and am of the same age as Zhong Jun (25), but unlike him, I have no opportunity to serve in the army. I will follow the example of Ban Chao (26), who threw aside the writing brush to enlist in the armed services and I admire Zong Que (27) who made up his mind to seek a military career by braving the wind and waves. I am determined not to accept the offer of a lifelong government position by wearing a hair dress and holding a tablet before the chest as court officials do. Rather, I will travel thousands of li to go home to wait on my parents, paying respect to them morning and evening. As a son I am not as good as Xie Xuan (28) but in my early years I had the fortune to have men of virtue as my neighbors. In a few days I will be with my father and I will take care of him and receive instructions from him as did Kong Li (29). On this day I have the honor to be invited by Governor Yan to this grand occasion. I am as blissful as if I had leaped over the Dragon’s Gate (30). Since I do not have someone like Yang Yi to recommend me (31), I can only sigh with grief and caress this piece of writing which
expresses my lofty aspiration. Now that I have met a bosom friend like Zhong Ziqi (32), why should I be ashamed of presenting this writing of mine?
Ah! A beautiful scenic spot is rarely seen, and a sumptuous banquet like this one is even less likely to be held again. The grand gathering at the Orchid Pavilion (33) is an event in history and the famous Jinggu Garden (34) is now in ruins. I have the good fortune to attend this feast and I would like to leave this farewell message at the time of paring. I count on all the gentlemen here to ascend the tower and contribute their writings. I humbly compose this short piece in all sincerity. Since every one of us is required to write a poem, the following is what I write:
The lofty King Teng ’ s Tower Overlooks the River.
The jade pendants (35) tinkle, and the carriage bells jingle.
The banquet’ s over, the guests are leaving, and the singing and the dancing have stopped.
In the morn the rosy clouds from the southern shore flit across the painted pillars.
In the eve the rain in the western mountains are drawn in by the red curtains.
The lazy clouds are reflected in the water and the days pass in leisure.
Things change and stars move; how many years have passed since the building of the Tower? Where is its builder, King Teng?
Only the River outside the railing flows to the east all by itself.
(I )In old times the sky was divided into 28 constellations, and each constellation had influence on a certain area on the earth. Nanchang was under the influence of the Ye and the Zhen constellations.
(2)The Heng Mountain is located to the southwest of Nanchang and the Lu Mountain to its north.
(3)The three rivers are the Jing, the Song, and the Zhe rivers.
(4)In old times there was a piece of cloth in the upper part of a long gown, with which people used to wrap things.
(5)The five lakes are the Tai, the Poyang, the Qingcao, the Danyang, and the Dongting lakes.
(6)The Jing area was the Chu area prior to the Qin Dynasty. It was less developed than the rest of the country.
(7)Il now mainly refers to Zhejiang Province.
(8)The name of a kingdom during the Zhou Dynasty (1046B.C.- 256 B.C.) , mainly referring to the east of Zhejiang Province, Jiangsu Province, and part of Anhui Province.
(9)It was said that during the Jin Dynasty, there appeared a purple vapor between the Niu and the Dou constellations. Later people discovered a precious sword in Hongzhou.
(IO)Xu Ru was a poor scholar in the Eastern Han Dynasty. Despite poverty, he declined to be a government official. When Chen Fan was the prefect of Yuzhang County, he received no guests except Xu Ru, for whom a bed was always prepared in his home.
(11 )It refers to Yuwen Jun, who was newly appointed as prefect of Lizhou.
(12)It refers to King Teng’s Power.
(13)Prince of Xiao of the Liang State of the Western Han Dynasty often entertained scholars in the bamboo garden by the Sui River.
(14)Tao Yuanming was the author of “A Tale of the Fountain of the Peach Blossom Spring”.
(15)Cao Cao and his son Cao Zhi often entertained guests by River Ye. Cao Zhi had written a poem in praise of the lotus flowers.
(16)Xie Lingyun was an official in Linchuan Prefecture, Jiangxi Province. Another interpretation
is that Wang Xizhi is referred to here, because he was also an official in Linchuan.
(17)Wuhui is today’s City of Suzhou in Jiangsu Province.
(18)During the reign of Emperor Wen of the Han Dynasty, Jia Yi was exiled to Changsha and was called back to the court four years later.
(19)Feng Tang was an official of a low rank in the Han Dynasty. During the reign of Emperor Wu, he was recommended to a high-ranking official. But it was too late, as he was already over ninety and could no longer serve the emperor.
(20)Li Guang, a military man during the reign of Emperor Wu of the Han Dynasty. He had performed many military exploits but had never been fully rewarded.
(21)Liang Hong was a scholar during the Eastern Han Dynasty. He wrote a satirical song to criticize the noblemen and offended the emperor. He had to escape to the Qi and the Lu areas, which were near the sea.
40
(22)It was believed that on the outskirts of Guangzhou there was the Spring of Avarice. People became avaricious after drinking its water.
(23)Meng Chang was an upright official during the Eastern Han Dynasty, but he never got a high position.
(24)Ruan Ji was a scholar in the Wei and the Jin dynasties. He was angry with the rotten politics of his time and often went out in his carriage. When the road was blocked, he would cry and turn back.
(25)Zhong Jun was a young man living in the Western Han Dynasty. He made up his mind to capture the king of the enemy when he was about twenty years of age.
(26)Ban Chao was a scribe during the Eastern Han Dynasty. He later performed military exploits and was rewarded.
(27)Zong Que was a young man during the Southern Dynasty (420-589). When asked what he would do in the future, he answered that he would go to the front and “brave the wind and waves”. Later he became a general.
(28)Xie Xuan, a young man during the Eastern Jin Dynasty. His uncle praised him as “the treasure tree of the Xie family.”
(29)Kong Li was the son of Confucius.
(30)The Dragon’s Gate is a narrow pass in the shape of a gate in the Longmen Mountain where the Yellow River flows through. It was believed that if a carp leaped over the gate, it would turn into a dragon.
(31)Yang Deyi recommends Sima Xiangru, a great poet, to Emperor Wu of the Han Dynasty.
(32)Zhong Ziqi, a man living the Spring and Autumn Period. It was said that he was a master in playing the qin, a seven-stringed plucked musical instrument. Bo Ya regarded him as his bosom friend because he understood the music Bo Ya played.
(33)See “Prologue to the Collection of Poems Composed at the Orchid Pavilion”.
(34)See “Entertainment Given in the Peach and Plum Garden on a Spring Evening”.
(35)In old times people wore a jade pendant to the body and it gave a tinkling sound when the person moved.


春夜宴桃李園序
王宏印
Feasting in the Peach-plum Garden in Spring Night
By Li Po
The world is an inn for all creatures and time is a passing traveler of endless generations. The floating life is like a dream, and how brief the enjoyment is! Indeed, it was with good reason that the ancients made nocturnal excursions by bearing candle lights.
It should be indeed more so with us now that the sunny spring invites me with vapoury scenes, the big earth provides me with such a beautiful picture. Here we gather in the beautiful garden of peach and plum, and enjoy fraternal love. You younger brothers are all men of refinement and elegancy like Hwai Lien, but amidst singing and chanting I myself feel ashamed to be compared with Kang Lo.
Before silent appreciation comes lo the end, our lofty chat turns to puretalk. The ambrosian banquet is served amid the flowers, and the flight of the winged goblet makes us drunk under the moon. Without fine poems how can our refined taste be satisfied? If anyone fails to produce a poem, let him be punished according to the rule of the Gold Valley Garden.

羅經國
Entertainment Given in the Peach and Plum Garden on a Spring Evening
Li Bai
As regards heaven and earth, they are nothing but an inn for all living creatures. As regards time, it is nothing but a passerby in the long run of a hundred generations. Since our life is as fleeting as a dream, how long can our joy possibly last? Therefore, there are plenty of reasons for the ancients to amuse themselves at night, holding a candle in their hands. The warm spring attracts us with her resplendent beauty dazzling in haze, and nature provides u with scenery of splendor and charm. Gathered in this fragrant garden full of peach and plum flowers in blossom, we talk to our hearts' content about family love and happiness. All my cousins are as handsome and talented as Xie Huilian (1). All of us compose poems and read them aloud, but I am ashamed of myself for being
42
no match for Duke of Kangle (2). While we are still quietly enjoying the beauty of the spring evening, the hearty talk shifts from lofty topics to lighter and elegant matters. A sumptuous feast is served in the midst of flowers. Having circulated the wine cups for many a round, we get drunk in the moonlight. Without good poems how can we give vent to our jovial feelings? Thus, if one fails to produce good poetry, he deserves to be punished by drinking three cups, as the ancients did in Jingu Garden (3).
ian was a man of letters during the Southern Dynasty. He was the brother of Xie Lingyun (385-433), a celebrated poet of his time. Li Bai here was praising his cousins by comparing them with Xie Huilian.
(2)Duke of Kangle was a title granted by the emperor to the family of Xie Lingyun. Li Bai was modest in saying that he was not as gifted as Xie Lingyun.
(3)Name of the garden of Shi Chong. He used to entertain his friends in the Jingu Garden and whoever failed to produce good poems was made to drink three cups of wine as a forfeit.

吊古戰場文
L. Cranmer Byng 
An Old Battle-field
Li Hua (Circa A.D. 850)


Vast, vast - an endless wilderness of sand;
A stream crawls through its tawny banks; the hills Encompass it; where in the dismal dusk Moan the last sighs of sunset. Shrubs are gone, Withered the grass; all chill as the white rime Of early morn. The birds go soaring past, The beasts avoid it; for the legend runs — Told by the crook'd custodian of the place -Of some old battle-field. "Here many a time," He quavered, "armies have been overwhelmed, And the faint voices of the unresting dead Often upon the darkness of the night Go wailing by." O sorrow! O ye Ch'ins!
Ye Hans! ye dynasties for ever flown!

Ye empires of the dust! for I have heard How, when the Ch'is and Weis embattled rose Along the frontier, when the Chings and Hans Gathered their multitudes, a myriad leagues Of utter weariness they trod. By day Grazing their jaded steeds, by night they ford The hostile stream. The endless earth below, The boundless sky above, they know no day Of their return. Their breasts are ever bared To the pitiless steel and all the wounds of war
44
Unspeakable.
Methinks I see them now, Dust-mantled in the bitter wind, a host Of Tartar warriors in ambuscade.
Our leader scorns the foe. He would give battle Upon the threshold of the camp. The stream Besets a grim array where order reigns, Though many hearts may beat, where discipline Is all, and life of no account.
The spear
Now works its iron will, the startled sand Blinding the combatants together locked In the death-grip; while hill and vale and stream Glow with the flash and crash of arms. Then cold The shades of night o'erwhelm them; to the knee In snow, beards stiff with ice. The carrion bird Hath sought its nest. The war-horse in its strength Is broken. Clothes avail not. Hands are dead, Flesh to the frost succumbs. Nature herself Doth aid the Tartar with a deadly blast Following the wild onslaught. Wagons block The way. Our men, beset with flank attacks, Surrender with their officers. Their chief Is slain. The river to its topmost banks
Swollen with death; the dykes of the Great Wall Brimming with blood.
Nation and rank are lost
45
In that vast-heaped corruption.
Faintly now,
And fainter beats the drum; for strength is shorn, And arrows spent, and bow-strings snapped, and swords Shattered. The legions fall on one another
In the last surge of life and death. To yield
Is lo become a slave; to fight is but To mingle with the desert sands.
No sound
Of bird now flutters from the hushed hillside;
All, all is still, save for the wind that wails
And whistles through the long night where the ghosts Hither and thither in the gloom go by, And spirits from the nether world arise Under the ominous clouds. The sunlight pales Athwart the trampled grass; the fading moon Still twinkles on the frost-flakes scattered round.

三戒
Three Fables
I have always disliked those men of today who, blind to their own shortcomings, take advantage of circumstances or powerful protectors to lord it over others, bragging of their skill and seizing every chance to swagger. Such bullies always come to grief in the end. I shall therefore relate three stories told me, which put me in mind of this, about a deer, a donkey and some rats.

鈷鉧潭記
Brazier Lake
Brazier Lake lies west of the Western Hill. Its source is the Ran which plunges south till, stopped by a mountain boulder, it veers east and races along, pounding against the bank, till now it has eaten away a large tract of land, channeling out the centre down to impermeable rock. After foaming into a whirlpool, it flows slowly into ten mu of calm, clear water, embowered with trees and with fountains cascading into it.
The man who lived above this lake saw how often I visited it. One day he knocked at my door, and told me that because he could not pay his taxes and was deep in debt he had made a clearing in the hills and was moving away. He wanted to sell his property by the lake to try to tide himself over.
I fell in with this gladly. Then I rebuilt his pavilion, extended his balustered walks, and made the fountain there fall into the pool from a height with a deep echoing sound. So now no better spot can be found for enjoying the moon in mid-autumn, for here you can see the sublimity of the sky, the infinity of space. And thanks to this lake I can rest content in these wild parts and forget my home!

三戒永某氏之鼠
The Rats of Yongzhou
Liu Zongyuan
A certain householder in Yongzhou had a dread of unlucky days and observed them very strictly. Because he was born in the year of the Rat, he considered rats as holy. This being the case, he would keep no cat or dog, and forbade his servants to catch rats. Unchecked, they had the run of his store-room and kitchen.
As news of this spread among rats, more and more of them flocked to his house, where they could eat their fill with nothing to fear. They broke all the household utensils, gnawed through all the clothes on the hangers. The members of the household had to be content with the food they left over. Processions of rats mingled freely with men in broad daylight, and at night they made such a
din by stealing food and fighting that not one could sleep. Still the inmates of the house put up with them.
After some years this family left and another household moved in, but the rats carried on as before. "These are creatures of darkness," said the newcomers, "but now they are running riot. Why were they allowed to get out of hand like this?"
They borrowed five or six cats, closed all the doors, removed the tiles from the roof, and poured water down all the holes, getting slave boys to help catch the rats. Soon a mound of dead rats was piled up in a corner, and the place stank for several months.
This is a lesson for those who think they can fill their bellies for ever at public expense with nothing to fear.
49

三戒黔之驢
The Donkey of Guizhou
Liu Zongyuan
There were no donkeys in Guizhou until an eccentric took one there by boat; but finding no use for it he set it loose in the hills. A tiger who saw this monstrous looking beast thought it must be divine. It first surveyed the donkey from under cover, then ventured a little nearer, still keeping a respectful distance however.
One day the donkey brayed, and the tiger took fright and fled, for fear of being bitten. It was utterly terrified. But it came back for another look, and decided this creature was not so formidable after all. Then, growing used to the braying, it drew nearer, thought it still dared not attack. Coming nearer still, it began to take liberties, shoving, jostling, and charging roughly, till
the donkey lost its temper and kicked out.
“So that is all it can do!” thought the tiger, greatly pleased.
Then it leapt on the donkey and sank its teeth into it, severing its throat and devouring it before going on its way.
Poor donkey! Its sized made it look powerful, and its bray made it sound redoubtable. Had it not shown all it could do, even the fierce tiger might not have dared to attack. But the donkey gave itself away!
50
三戒永某氏之鼠
The Rats of Yongzhou
Liu Zongyuan
A certain householder in Yongzhou had a dread of unlucky days and observed them very strictly. Because he was born in the year of the Rat, he considered rats as holy. This being the case, he would keep no cat or dog, and forbade his servants to catch rats. Unchecked, they had the run of his store-room and kitchen.
As news of this spread among rats, more and more of them flocked to his house, where they could eat their fill with nothing to fear. They broke all the household utensils, gnawed through all the clothes on the hangers. The members of the household had to be content with the food they left over. Processions of rats mingled freely with men in broad daylight, and at night they made such a din by stealing food and fighting that not one could sleep. Still the inmates of the house put up with them.
After some years this family left and another household moved in, but the rats carried on as before. "These are creatures of darkness," said the newcomers, "but now they are running riot. Why were they allowed to get out of hand like this?"
They borrowed five or six cats, closed all the doors, removed the tiles from the roof, and poured water down all the holes, getting slave boys to help catch the rats. Soon a mound of dead rats was piled up in a corner, and the place stank for several months.
This is a lesson for those who think they can fill their bellies for ever at public expense with nothing to fear.

三戒臨江之糜
The Deer of Linjiang
Liu Zong Yuan
A man of Linjiang caught a young deer and decided to keep it. But when he took it home, all his dogs bounded up with lolling tongues and wagging tails, making their master both angry and alarmed. So every day he carried the deer to the dogs in order that they should grow used to it and learn not to hurt it. And by degrees he allowed them to play together.
As time went by, all his dogs did as he wished. The deer grew and forgot that it was a deer but thought the dogs were its friends. It would butt them, lie down beside them, and make quite free with them. And the dogs, out of fear of their master, played up to it. From time to time, though, they would lick their chops.
When three years had passed, the dear went out of the gate. Seeing many dogs from other houses on the road, it ran to play with them. But the sight of it threw these strange dogs into a frenzy. They fell on the deer and devoured it, scattering its remains on the ground. And so the deer perished — without understanding the reason.

小石城山記
The Mountain of the Little Rock City
Heading directly northward from the mountain pass at the western mountain and going downhill after crossing Huangmao Hill, you will come to two mountain paths. One path leads westward and there is not much to see. The other path turns a little northward and then eastward, but forty zhang (1) further, the path ends, as it is cut into halves by a river. Standing along the bank of the river is a hill of rocks. On it some rocks are piled like the parapets of a city wall, and some like beams. Beside them protrudes a rock in the shape of a fort, on which there is a door-like cave. The cave is dark inside, and should you throw a stone in it, you will clearly hear a "dong, dong" sound, which reverberates for a long while. Go up round the fort and you can reach the hill-top, where you can see into the distance. There is no soil, but this makes the beautiful trees and arrow bamboos growing on it look all the more unusual and sturdy. They are well spaced and their heights vary in an appropriate way as if their placement were designed by a clever man.
Ah! I have long been skeptical about the existence of God. Now I cannot help but believe that there is a God. But I am puzzled as to why God did not set this beautiful scenery in the prosperous midland, choosing instead this remote seclude place where its beauty has been concealed from human appraisal for thousands of years and wasted. God would not have done such a silly thing. Is there a God then? Some would say, "God did this in order to comfort those virtuous people who are exiled here." Others say, "The spirit of ingenuity did not breed great men, but created this scenery of peculiar charm instead. This is why in the south of the Kingdom of Chu (2) there is a scarcity of virtuous and talented men but an abundance of rocks." I doubt the truth in cither of these sayings.
(1)	Zhang is a unit of length.
(2)	Chu is the name for the region covering Hunan and Hubei provinces.


愚溪詩序
Fool's Stream
Liu Zongyuan
North of the Guan River is a stream which flows eastwards into the Xiao River. Some say this stream is called Ran because a family named Ran once lived there; others say it was so called because its water can be used for dyeing (1). After I was punished for my folly by being exiled to the banks of the Xiao, I fell in love with this stream and followed it for two or three li until I came to its most delightful spot, then settled down there. In ancient times there used to be a Fool's Valley. Now that I was staying with this stream, the name of which had not yet been determined but was still being disputed by the local people, I had to give it a name. So I renamed it Fool's Stream.
Beside Fool's Stream I bought a hillock, and called it Fool's Mound. Sixty paces northeast I discovered a fountain, which I also purchased and named Fool's Fountain. Fool's Fountain, which has its source higher up, has six outlets on the flat ground at the foot of this hillock. These brooklets join and wind southwards to Fool's Ditch. I had earth and stones carried over to dam the narrowest part of the ditch to form Fool's Pond. East of Fool's Pond stands Fool's Hall, with Fool's
54
Pavilion to its south. In the middle of the pool is Fool's Islet, with an abundance of fine trees and curious rocks. These are all rare sights, but because of me they have been given a bad name.
Since water is appreciated by all intelligent men (2), why did I give this stream the bad name of Fool's Stream? Because it flows through low ground, it cannot be used to irrigate fields; and because it runs swiftly and is filled with boulders, large boats cannot navigate it. Moreover, since it is out of the way, shallow and narrow, dragons must scorn to make clouds and rain of its water. Hence it does no good lo men. This is just like my own case, and therefore I am not wrong to call it Fool's Stream.
Ning Wuzi (3) posed as a fool when his state was badly governed — a case of a wise man turning into a fool. Yan Zi (4) seemed a fool because he never contradicted anyone — a case of a judicious man appearing like a fool. These were not real fools. Now I live in an age of good rule, but I acted counter to reason and made mistakes in my work; so there can be no greater fool than I. This being so, no one in the world can dispute my ownership of this stream: I can keep it to myself and name it as I please.
Though this stream does no good to men, it reflects all things clearly, being limpid and transparent, and tinkles merrily; so a fool is happy to linger here, and cannot bear to go away. Though I am unfitted for worldly affairs, I find great comfort in writing, touching upon all subjects, embracing all forms, and avoiding nothing. When I sing my foolish songs about Fool's Stream, we seem to merge with no discord into one, blending into the infinity of space, growing utterly tranquil and divested of self. Thus I wrote "Eight Poems on the Fool," and had them inscribed on a rock beside the stream.
(I)	The Chinese word for "dye" is pronounced "ran".
(2)	A quotation from the Analects: "The intelligent man appreciates water."
(3)	A native of the State of Wei, who lived in the seventh century BC.
(4)	The favourite disciple of Confucius.

捕蛇者說
楊憲益戴乃迭
The Snake-Catcher
Liu Zongyuan
The country around Yongzhou yields a curious snake — black with white spots. Any plant it touches dies, and its bite is fatal. But if caught and dried for medicine, it cures leprosy, palsy and boils, heals putrid sores and checks all noxious humours. In earlier times it was decreed that two snakes should be presented each year to the imperial physician, and that those who captured them should be exempted from other taxes. So the people of Yongzhou made every effort to catch them. I questioned a man named Jiang, whose family had made a living in this way for three generations.
“My grandfather died of snake-bite, so did my father,” he told me in great distress. “Now I have followed in their steps for twelve years, and narrowly escaped death several times.”
I pitied him.
“If you hate this calling,” I said, “I can ask the authorities to release you from it and let you pay land tax instead. What do you say?”
Jiang was appalled. Tears welled up in his eyes.
“Have pity on me, sir!” he cried. “Though this is a wretched life, it is better than paying taxes. If
56
not for these snakes, I would have come to grief long ago. For the sixty years that my grandfather, father and I have lived here, our neighbors have been more and more hard put to it every day. When their soil is exhausted, their savings spent, they leave their homes lamenting to fall hungry and thirsty by the wayside; or toil winter and summer in the wind and rain, contracting diseases till their corpses pile up. Of my grandfather's generation, not one in ten is left; not three in ten of my father's; and not five in ten of those who were my neighbors twelve years ago. The rest are dead or gone while I alone live on — because I catch snakes. When those bullying tax-collectors come to our area, they bellow and curse from east to west and rampage from north to south, making such a fearful din that the very birds and dogs have no peace. Then I tiptoe from my bed to look into my pitcher, but breathe freely again at the sight of my snakes and lie down once more. I feed my snakes carefully, and present them in due season, then come home to enjoy the fruits of my fields in comfort. I risk death twice a year, but live happily for the rest, unlike my neighbours who face death every day. Though I die of snake-bite, I shall have outlived most of them. How could I hate this calling?”
At this I pitied the fellow even more.
I used to doubt that saying of Confucius: “Tyranny is more rapacious than a tiger.” But Jiang's case convinced me of its truth. Alas, to think that taxation can prove more dire than a poisonous snake! So I have written this essay for those who study conditions in the countryside.
羅經國 
The Snake Catcher
Liu Zongyuan
In the wilderness on the outskirts of Yongzhou there exists a kind of snake with black skin marked with white stripes. Any plant dies upon its touch and anyone bitten by it is doomed to die. But once it is caught and dehydrated, it can serve as an ingredient of a traditional medicine for the cure of leprosy, arthritis, swollen necks, malignant tumors, the removal of decayed flesh, and the elimination of three kinds of worms that cause illness. Since early times the court physician has ordered the people in the name of the emperor to hand in snakes twice a year. Whoever does so is exempted from taxation. People in Yongzhou are vying with one another to catch snakes.
There is a man whose surname is Jiang. His family has been enjoying this privilege for three generations. When asked, he told me with deep grief, “My grandfather was killed by a snake, and so was my father. I myself have been engaged as a snake catcher for twelve years and might have been killed many a time.” I sympathized with him, saying, “Are you complaining about this work? I shall ask the official in charge to transfer you to your former work and renew the taxation on you. How would you like that?”
57
My words threw him into great agony. He burst into tears and said, “Do you pity me and want me to live on? But the misery I am suffering now is not at all worse than what I suffered before. If I had not taken this work, I would be in desperate straits. Three generations of my family have been living here for sixty years. Our neighbors are growing poorer day by day. In order to pay the taxes, they are compelled to hand over all the produce of their land and all the possessions in their house. They shuffle from village to village, wailing in distress, and many of them die of hunger along the way. They are beaten by wind and rain, suffering freezing cold in winter and scorching heat in summer. What’s more, they have to inhale the pernicious air of deceased districts. In this way, people are dying one after another, and their dead bodies are piling up. Out of ten families that were my grandfather’s neighbors, only one has survived, and out of ten families that were my father’s neighbors, only two or three remain. As to the neighbors who have been living near me for the past twelve years, only four or five out of ten families have survived. Most of them are dead or have moved to other places. I luckily remain alive simply because I am a snake catcher. Whenever the relentless officers come lo the village, they make a row and bully the people. The village people scream from terror. Even fowls and dogs are not left in peace. I start from my bed with fear and look into the jar. To my relief the snakes are still there. Then my mind is at ease and I return lo bed. I feed the snakes with great care and deliver them to the authorities in time. Back at home, I eat the produce of the land so that I may live on till my death. I risk my life only twice a year. The rest of the time, I spend my days quite happily, unlike other village people whose lives are constantly threatened. Even if I were killed by a snake today, I would still have lived longer than my neighbors. Why should I complain?”
I feel all the more depressed upon hearing his story. I was once disbelieving of Confucius’s words: “Tyrannical rule is more ferocious than a tiger.” From Jiang’s example I have come to realize that
this saying is true. Alas! Who could have known that oppressive taxation is worse than venomous snakes? Hence I write down this story for those who are making investigations relating to the life of the common people.
58
至小丘西小石潭記
The Small Tarn West of the Knoll
Liu Zongyuan
A hundred and twenty paces west of the knoll, across the bamboos and bushes I heard with delight a gurgling like the sound made by jade bracelets. So I cut a path through the bamboos till I came upon a small pool of clear water. The bottom was of rock and a spring gushed out from the boulders near the bank. Rocks formed little islets and crags, overhung by green trees and vines which were growing in great profusion. There were about a hundred fish in the tarn, and they seemed to be gliding through empty space without support. In the sunlight which reached the bottom, casting shadows over the rocks, the fish would stay for a while motionless then suddenly dart far away. They scudded to and fro, as if sharing the visitors' delight.
Looking southwest in the chequered sunlight at the jagged, serpentine shore, you could not see the whole.
I sat by this tarn, with bamboos and trees all round me, in utter silence and solitude. The seclusion and quiet cast a chill over me; and the scene was one of such purity that I could not stay there long. So I marked the spot and left.
With me were Wu Wuling, Gong Gu, and my brother Zongxuan. And two of the Cui boys, Shuyi and Fengyi, had accompanied us to help us.

謝百魁
The Small Tarn West of the Knoll
Liu Zongyuan
A walk of some one hundred and twenty paces west of the knoll took us to a bamboo grove, across which we heard the sound of water ringing like silver pendants. Gladdened by this, we cut a path through the bamboos and were confronted with a small tarn, which was limpid and made us feel
59
chilly. It had a solid stone bottom. Closer to the shore, the stone rolled up and stood out in the shape of elevations, islets, rugged knolls and rocks. Green trees were wrapped in verdant vines, which, varied in length, drooped over the water and shook imperceptibly.
There were in the lam some one hundred heads of fish, all looking as if they were swimming in the air without any support. With the sunlight refracted into the water, the fish cast their shadows on the stone and seemed to be poising in ease and pleasure. Another moment they darted away,
scudding hither and thither, apparently partaking of the happiness of us onlookers.
Looking in the southwestern direction, we saw a stream meander in a serpentine manner, shimmering in different shades of green. The banks of the stream zigzagged like canine teeth, giving us no inkling as to its source.
Enclose by the dense bamboos, we were pervaded with a deep feeling of solitude and bone-chilling tranquility as well as a profound sense of melancholy and seclusion. The environment being too unworldly, we found it unfit to stay long and went away, keeping the place in our memory.
I was accompanied on this trip by Wu Wuling, Gong Gu and my brother Liu Zongxuan, and followed by two youngsters of a Cui family, one called Shuyi, another Fengyi.

阿房宮賦
潘正英
On the Ah Fang Palace
Tu Mu
After the end of the Six Kings the empire bounded by the four seas was unified under a single ruler; and with Shu Shan stripped of its woods, the Ah Fang Palace appeared. It stretched to more than three hundred li, covering the sun in the sky; and from the north of Li-Shan it meandered to the west, and then made straightway for Hsien Yang. Two rivers flowing gently coursed their way into the palace-walls.
At each five steps there stood a storeyed building, and at each ten steps, there stood a hall, with corridors winding like waving silk, and the projecting eaves turning high up like birds' bills. Each of the structures possessed its vantage of ground; but they were all ingeniously interlocked together, or one set against another. Some were domed, and others were curved. The courts were like so many cells in the beehive; and of the lofty eave-drippings who can tell how many millions
61
they were.
The long bridge is lying upon the waves; how can the dragon come without clouds? The roofed causeway is stretched in the air; how can the rainbow appear without having a clearing-up sky? Both the high and the low are shrouded in the mists, and it is hard to distinguish the east from the west.
When the singing platform was re-echoed with happy songs, it was full of genial warmth of the spring; but when the dancing sleeves became cold in the dancing hall, it was chilling like wind and rain. The climate did remain the same even on the same day and in the same palace!
Noble ladies, royal princes and their children, after bidding farewell to their own chambers and halls, were all carried away to the state of Ch'in; where they practiced singing and music in the morning and evening, and became palace-men and place-women of Ch'in.
Bright stars sparking — it was mirrors laid open. Green clouds floating about — it was hair-dressing in the morning. The Wei River swelling with grease — it was made by the waste of ointment. Smoke curling up and vapour spreading — it was burning of perfume. Thunder rolling suddenly — it was the passing of palace-carriages, which one heard rumbling far off, but none could tell where it went to. Each inch of the skin was beautified to the extreme, and each movement of the body was studied to the utmost. The pretty ladies, stood gazing and looked forward to a royal visit, and some of them had not had a single dance from the king for thirty-six years.
What Yen-Chao had laid up, what Han-Wei had accumulated, and What Ch'i-Ch'u had treasured up — for many generations and years pillaged from the people — were piled up like mountains; but once they could not hold their own all were transported here. Tripods and precious stones were
all scattered about in confusion, being little valued by the man of Ch'in.
Alas! Men are all like-minded, one or ten thousand. Ch'in loved splendour and luxury, and other men also coveted his house. Why should he exhaust every dram in taking in, and spend away like mud and sand — making the beam-bearing posts more than the peasants in the south fields ,the rafters on the roofs more than the female-weavers on the loom, the shining nail-caps more than the grain in the grand granaries, the uneven rows of tiles more than the silk threads all over the body, the balustrades, lengthwise and crosswise, more than the city-walls of the Nine States, sound of piped and stringed music more than the noise on the market — that the world dared to hate but not to speak, and the mind of the autocrat became daily prouder, and harder!
Behold, at the shout of the garrison guards the Hanku pass fell; and by the touch of the one torch of the man of Ch'u all became a sad stretch of scorched earth.
62
Alas, it was the Six States and not Ch'in that destroyed the Six States; and it was Ch'in and not the world that exterminated the clan of Ch'in. If each of the Six States had loved their own people they would have been strong enough to resist the power of Ch'in; and if Ch'in had loved the people of the Six States, he might have ruled the empire through succession from three to ten thousand generations; and who could have exterminated his clan? The man of Ch'in, having no opportunity of lamenting himself, was left to be lamented by later generations; and the later generations who lament Ch'in, but refuse to learn a lesson from him make later generations lament the later generations.
63
愛蓮說
Love of Water-lily
Lovers of flowering plants and shrubs we have had by scores, but Tao Qian alone devoted himself to the chrysanthemum. Since the opening days of the Tang dynasty, it has been fashionable to admire the peony; but my favourite is the water-lily. How stainless it rises from its slimy bed! How modestly it reposes on the clear pool — an emblem of purity and truth! Symmetrically perfect, its subtle perfume is wafted far and wide, while there it rests in spotless state, something to be regarded reverently from a distance, and not be profaned by familiar approach.
In my opinion the chrysanthemum is the flower of retirement and culture; the peony the flower of rank and wealth; the water-lily, the Lady Virtue sans pareille.
Alas! few have loved the chrysanthemum since Tao Qian, and none love the water-lily like myself, whereas the peony is a general favourite with all mankind.
64

祭十二郎文
羅經國
An Elegiac Address to the Twelfth Nephew (1)
Han Yu
Day, month, year (2). I, your youngest uncle, Han Yu, overwhelmed with grief, sent Jianzhong (3) on my behalf to offer you sacrifices to express my deep feelings for you, seven days after I heard about your death. Jianzhong had bought seasonal delicacies from a distant place as sacrificial offerings to your departed soul.
Alas! I lost my father during my early childhood. When I grew up, I did not know what my father was like. I was dependent on my eldest brother and his wife. My eldest brother, your father, was middle-aged when he died in the south (4), and together we accompanied his widow to bury him in Heyang (5). Then you and I went to the south to make a living (6). We two were orphaned and helpless and clung to each other's company every day. I had three brothers older than I, but unfortunately they all died early. In our family, you and I were the only descendants, you being of the third generation and I of the second generation. Of those two generations, each had only one successor remaining. We two were extremely lonely, with only our shadows left to us. My sister-in-law used to fondle you while pointing her finger at me, saying, "You two are the only survivors of the Han family." You were only an infant and could not understand her. And although I was able to recall what she said, I did not recognize the sadness in her words.
When I was nineteen, I went to the capital (7). Four years later I came home to visit you. Another four years passed. I went to Heyang to visit the graves of our ancestors, and met you there where you had the coffin of your mother interred. Two years later, you came to see me in Bianzhou (8) as I was working for Chengxiang (9) Dong. You stayed for a year, and then went home, intending
to bring your family over. But in the following year Chengxiang Dong died and I left Bianzhou before you could come back. That year I took office in Xuzhou (10), working as an official in charge of military supply. When the man I sent to fetch you had just set out, I left my post (11). Again you did not come. I thought even if you had come to the east (12), you would not have stayed long, for, after all, the east was not our native place. As a long-term plan I had better return to the west (13), establish myself and welcome you into my household. Alas! Who could have thought that you would suddenly die and leave me behind?
66
You and I were both young and I believed that although we might part for a brief period of time, we would eventually live together for a long time. Therefore, I left you and took up my residence in the capital to earn an official's meager salary. Had I known what would happen, I would not have left you for a single day, even if I were appointed to the highest office with ten thousand carriages at my command.
Last year, when Meng Dongye (14) went south, I asked him to bring a letter to you in which I wrote, "I am barely forty years old, but my eyesight is falling, my hair is graying and my teeth are loose. My uncles and brothers were all physically strong, but they all died in the prime of life. Delicate as I am, how can I live long? I cannot leave my post and you will not be coming. I might die at any moment, and you would be brought to eternal grief." Who can explain why the younger one dies whereas the elder one lives on, and why the healthy one succumbs early whereas the fragile one survives?
Alas! Was the news true? Or was it a hallucination? Or was it mere misinformation? If it was true, then why is it that my brother, who was a man of virtue, should have his son die young? Why couldn't his innocent and brilliant son be blessed by his goodness? Was it fair that the frail, elderly man should outlive the vigorous youth? I could not believe it was true. It was a hallucination, or a rumor. Then why is it that Dongye's letter and Genglan's obituary notice are at hand here? Alas! Then the news must be true. A virtuous man like my eldest brother had the life of his son taken away at an early age. An innocent and brilliant man like you, who should have carried on the family line, could not enjoy the blessings of his father. How unpredictable is Heaven's will! And how unfathomable is God's disposition! That is why the logic of things can never be reasoned out, and the continuation of one's existence cannot be foretold.
Nevertheless, since the beginning of this year, my gray hair has faded to white, and my loose teeth have decayed or fallen off. I am growing weaker and weaker and my vigor is waning. It won't be long before I follow you and die. If you should have consciousness after death, then our separation won't be long. If not, my grief will not last long either; eternity will follow in which I will be oblivious of grief.
Your son is just ten years old and my son is five. There exists no guarantee that these young and healthy ones will live long. How can we expect them to grow up to fulfill their careers? Alas! Alas!
Last year you wrote to me, saying, "I am suffering from numbness in the feet and sometimes it is growing worse." I replied, "Many people in the south suffer from that kind of illness." It did not cause me much anxiety. Did you eventually die of it? Or was it some other illness?
67
I received your letter which was written on June the seventeenth. Dongye said that you died on June the second. The obituary notice Gcnglan brought me gave no date of your death, but it was very likely that Dongye's messenger did not even ask your family about the date of your death. Genglan should know that an obituary notice should mention the date of death. How could he fail to mention yours? Perhaps when Dongye was writing the letter to me, he asked the messenger about the date, and the messenger mentioned a date at random. Was this guess true? Or not?
Now 1 am sending Jianzhong to offer you sacrifices and pay condolences to your children and your wet nurse. If they do not lack for food, they will remain beside you till the days of mourning
have passed. Then T will welcome them to my place. If they cannot do so, I will have them brought me without delay, and let the remaining servants carry on mourning until the end. If I can, I will move your coffin back home and re-inter you in the ancestral burial grounds in order to fulfill my lifelong wish.
Alas! I did not know when you were ill. Nor did I know the date of your death. When you were alive, I did not live with you to support you. When you were dead, I did not mourn over your remains to give vent to my bitter grief. When you were lying in the coffin, I did not follow the funeral procession. When you were interred, I did not come to your grave. I fear I am the cause of your untimely death as I have failed to live up to the expectations of the gods. I am neither kind nor filial. I did not live together with you to take care of you, nor die in your company. Now you are in the remotest edge of the heaven while I am in the remotest corner of the earth. When you were living, we were not always together as body and shadow, and now that you are dead, your soul does not meet me in my dream. It was all my own doing. When will my grief come to an end? I have no wish to live on, and will buy several hundred mu of land by the Yi and the Ying (15) rivers upon which to spend the rest of my life. I will educate my son and your son, hoping they will grow up to be men and I will bring up my daughter and your daughter and marry them off. Then can my wish be fulfilled.
Ah! My words have expired, but my grief has no end. Do you know or don't you know? Ah! How sorrowful I am!
May you partake of the offerings.
(l )The twelfth nephew of Han Yu was Han Laocheng. He was in fact the son of Han Yu's second elder brother and was adopted by Han Yu's eldest brother. Han Yu's father died when he was three
years old and he was brought up by his eldest brother and his wife.
(2)It was the custom in the past that the date of the elegiac address was not given, but according to
literary historians the date was May 26th, 803 A.D.
(3)Jianzhong was Han Yu's servant whom he sent to offer sacrifices to his nephew.
68
(4)When Han Yu was ten years old, his eldest brother died on his post in Shaoguan, Guangdong Province.
(5)Heyang is today's Meng County, Henan Province.
(6)In 781 A.D. Han Yu's family moved to Xuanzhou, Anhui Province to escape from the turmoil.
(7)In 786 A.D. Han Yu came to Chang'an from Xuanzhou, capital of the Tang Dynasty, now Xi'an.
(8)In 797 A.D. Han Yu came to Bianzhou (now Kaifeng City, Henan Province) to work under
Chengxiang Dong.
(9)Chengxiang Dong was Dong Jin. He was then jiedushi in Bianzhou, who was in charge of military and administrative affairs.
(10)In 798 A.D. Han Yu left Bianzhou and came to Xuzhou to serve under the military leader Zhang Ji.
(11 )In 800 A.D. Zhang Ji died and Han Yu went back to his hometown.
(12)In reference to Xuzhou.
(13)In reference to Henan Province.
(14)Meng Dongye was a famous poet of the Tang Dynasty. He was Han Yu's friend. On his way to his post in the south, Han Yu asked him to bring a letter to his nephew who was then living in Xuanzhou.
(!5)The Yi River and the Ying River were both in Henan Province, where Han Yu's hometown
was.

古硯說
An Old Ink-Stone
Xu Xie
I have an old ink-stone, given me some years ago by a friend, which I kept out for ordinary use, unaware how old it was. Then a connoisseur told me, “This dates from the Five Dynasties or Song Dynasty (I). You should treasure it as an antique and not let it get damaged.” After hearing that I did treasure it, but never had the time to verify whether it was a Five-dynasties or Song-dynasty stone.
However, even if this really was a Five-dynasties or Song stone, the men of those days would have used it as an ordinary ink-stone. How could they know that it would escape destruction and come down to the present time as an antique? Now that it has come down to us we know that it dates from the Five Dynasties or Song, but not how it would have been regarded by the men of those times, who treasured relics of the Zhou, Qin, Han and Wei dynasties (2). Nor do we know how the men of Zhou, Qin, Han and Wei would have regarded objects which belonged to their own times.
70
This world, as we can see, is full of people hustling about and indulging in luxury and licence, who tuck up their robes and wet their feet in their hurry to call on the great, and suffer slights without any sense of shame. If a man disapproves of this and hold aloof, finding all his delight in old lyres, books, paintings and other objects, he is dubbed an antiquary. An antiquary cannot be vulgar; and since his tastes differ from those of the vulgar, the vulgar imitate them. Thereupon the men out for profit and advancement do their best to collect curiosities to curry favour with great nobles; great nobles display those they possess to impress men; and the scholars with nothing to do but admire antiques join in the contest too, not resting content till they have equaled the other men’s collection.
But these are not true antiquaries, they merely share the tastes of the vulgar. So if they still brag and pose as antiquaries to mark themselves different from the vulgar, they may be so in name but not in fact.
To my mind, an antiquary is one who studies the teachings of the ancients, writes in their style and wishes he could have known them. Since this is impossible, he searches high and low for things that have passed through their hands and takes pleasure in these because they conjure up the men of old—this is why his enjoyment of them never palls. For it is the men of old whom antiquaries love, not the things they used. If it were only the latter, what difference is there between things ancient and modern? Now since I admire not the objects but the men, I can become a man of the old type myself; and for all I know, hundreds of generations to come, antiquaries may admire me too. What folly it would be, then, to spurn what is ours and admire nothing but what is ancient.
Most of today’s fashions appear to me of this sort—one thing in name, but quite another in fact. As such cases are too numerous to mention, I have written about an old ink-stone to convey
(I )Five Dynasties: 907-960, Song Dynasty: 960-1279
(2)Zhou, Qin, Han and Wei dynasties: from twelfth century BC to third century AD.
英雄之言
楊憲益戴乃迭
On the Words of Great Men
Luo Yin
Sometimes things may have an insignificant appearance in order to prevent them from being despoiled. So it is with people. Now a robber is also a human being; he wears hats and clothes. He is distinguishable only by an unstable character as regards personal morals. When one steals valuables, one may make the excuse that cold and hunger leave no alternative; when one takes over a state, one might argue that its people must be rescued from oppression. We need not bother about the former excuse; as for the latter a concern for the people is essential. But Liu Bang’s only words were, “This is the way in which a great man should live.” And Xiang Yu said, “We can take his power from him.” I do not suppose that they lacked a sense of modesty and moral scruples, but because they witnessed the luxury and exalted status of the emperor they started to have such ideas.
So seldom are grand palaces and splendid trappings not coveted by others, that great men as well as ordinary people behave in this way.

賀新郎
Congratulations to the Bridegroom
Reply to Wang Shizhi on His Worries of the Frontiers
Liu Kezhuang
The state at stake,
When can we take
The long, long rope in hand To bind the foe invading our land? Is there on earth no talents strong? The measure should be long.
General Han did not learn from a sage. Nor know the secret of the Golden Age. Laughing the rose And beat the foes.
While young, we rhymed each other’s verse, And opened new horizon for better or worse.
Bui now we sigh.
Looking into the mirror in tower high
To find our hair sprinkled with frost
And many chances lost.
‘Tis said the northern wind would bite the face, The foe would dance with ladder high on the frontier. Don’t say the river can't be crossed by our cavalier. Since olden days a hero could turn the tide.
The stronghold can’t be strong without the general’s guide. Give up the pen and take the spear!
Don’t leave only on the pillar your trace!
73

醉翁亭記
楊憲益戴乃迭
The Roadside Hut of the Old Drunkard
Ouyang Xiu
The District of Chu is enclosed all around by hills, of which those in the southwest boast the most lovely forests and dales. In the distance, densely wooded and possessed of a rugged beauty, is Mt. Langya. When you penetrate a mile or two into this mountain you begin to hear the gurgling of a stream, and presently the stream — the Brewer's Spring — comes into sight cascading between two peaks. Rounding a bend you see a hut with a spreading roof by the stream, and this is the Roadside Hut of the Old Drunkard. This hut was built by the monk Zhixian. It was given its name by the governor, referring to himself. The governor, coming here with his friends, often gets tipsy after a little drinking; and since he is the most advanced in years, he calls himself the Old Drunkard. He delights less in drinking than in the hills and streams, taking pleasure in them and expressing the feeling in his heart through drinking.
Now at dawn and dusk in this mountain come the changes between light and darkness: when the sun emerges, the misty woods become clear; when the clouds hang low, the grottoes are wrapped in gloom. Then in the course of the four seasons, You find wild flowers burgeoning and blooming with a secret fragrance, the stately trees put on their mantle of leaves and give a goodly shade, until wind and frost touch all with austerity, the water sinks low and the rocks at the bottom of the stream emerge. A man going there in the morning and returning in the evening during the
74
changing pageant of the seasons can derive endless pleasure from the place.
And the local people may be seen making their way there and back in an endless stream, the old and infirm as well as infants in arms, men carrying burdens who sing as they go, passersby stopping to rest beneath the trees, those in front calling out and those behind answering. There the governor gives a feast with a variety of dishes before him, mostly wild vegetables and mountain produce. The fish are freshly caught from the stream, and since the stream is deep and the fish are fat; the wine is brewed with spring water, and since the spring is sweet the wine is superb. There they feast and drink merrily with no accompaniment of strings or flutes; when someone wins a game of touhu or chess, when they mark up their scores in drinking games together, or raise a cheerful din sitting or standing, it can be seen that the guests are enjoying themselves. The elderly man with white hair in the middle, who sits utterly relaxed and al his ease, is the governor, already half drunk.
Then the sun sinks towards the hills, men's shadows begins to Hit about and scatter; and now the governor leaves, followed by his guests. In the shade of the woods birds chirp above and below, showing that the men have gone and the birds are at peace. But although the birds enjoy the hills and forests, they cannot understand the men's pleasure in them; and although men enjoy accompanying the governor there, they cannot understand his pleasure cither. The governor is able to share his enjoyment with others when he is in his cups, and sober again can write an essay about it. Who is this governor? Ouyang Xiu of Luling.

潘正英
The Story of the Old Drunkard Tower
Ou-yang Hsiu
The prefecture of Chu is surrounded with hills on all sides. The wooded ravines of the south-west peaks are particularly beautiful. Lo, there is Lang Ya Hill shrouded in deep, luxuriant blue. After a few miles' walk in the mountains, the murmur of a stream will gradually come within hearing — that is the Brewing Fountain pouring down between two peaks. By turning round the peak along a bending path there appears a tower standing like a perching bird above the fountain — that is the Old Drunkard Tower. Who built the tower? A Buddhist monk, the Wise Immortal. Who gave it the name? The Prefect refers to himself. The Prefect comes to drink here with his guests. Only a little drinking will make him drunk; and being the eldest he therefore calls himself the old drunkard. The old drunkard is not interested in the wine, but in the hills and rivers. The joy of hills and rivers, found in the heart, mingles itself with the wine.
To illustrate, the sunrise dispersing the mists over the woods, and the return of clouds dimming the caves below the rocks — this is the alteration of light and shade, which represents the morning
75
and evening in the mountains. Sweet smell emitting from the fresh wild grass; luxuriant shades made by the fine trees; the high, clear skies, windy and frosty; rocks standing out of receding water — these are the changes of the four seasons in the mountains. Going out in the morning and coming back in the evening, one finds each of the four seasons has its different scenery, and the pleasure is inexhaustible.
As for the carriers on the road, the wayfarers taking rest under the trees, some shouting ahead and some score behind, and others bent with burdens going to and fro without a break — these are visitors from Chu itself. To angle at the stream where the stream is deep and the fishes arc fat; to brew the fountain water into wine where the water is delicious and the wine is clear; and with mountain game and wild vegetable placed before him in a confused manner — that is the Prefect at banquet. The pleasure of revelry is music neither of string, no of bamboo. The shooters hitting the marks; the chess-players scoring victory; winecups and counters mixed together; and people sitting down and rising up with much noise — the guests are happy and merry. And amidst the crowd a man with a sallow face and while hair, being hardly able to stand firm — that is the Prefect made drunk.
Soon the sun touching the mountain, and the shadows of men being scattered in confusion — the Prefect, followed by his guests, is going back. In the shades of the groves warbling is heard up and down — the birds are enjoying themselves after the departure of the visitors. The birds enjoy mountains and woods, but understand not the pleasure of men; and men enjoy the pleasure of following the Prefect in excursion, but they know not what pleasure the Prefect enjoys. He who shares their pleasures in drunkenness, and when awake can relate it in writing — this is the Prefect. Who is the Prefect? — Ou-yang Hsiu of Lu Ling.

羅經國
The Pavilion of the Drunken Old Man
Ouyang Xiu
Chu Zhou is surrounded with mountains. The forests and valleys on the southwest ridge are especially beautiful. Lying in the distance, where the trees grow luxuriantly and gracefully, is the Langya Mountain. Six or seven li up the mountain path, a gurgling sound grows clearer and clearer. It is from a spring that falls between two mountains. The spring is called the Wine-Making Spring. The path turns and twists along the mountain ridge, and above the spring rests a pavilion perching aloft like a bird with wings outstretched. This is the Pavilion of the Drunken Old Man. Who built this pavilion? Monk Zhixian, who lived in the mountain. And who furnished it with that name? It was the prefect, who named it after his own alias. The prefect often comes here to drink wine with his friends and he easily gets tipsy after a few cups. Being oldest in age among his
76
companions, he calls himself "the drunken old man". The drinker's heart is not in the cup, but in the mountains and waters. The joy he gets from them is treasured in the heart, and now and then he will express it through wine-drinking.
In the morning, the rising sun disperses the forest mists, and in the evening, the gathering clouds darken the caves and valleys. This shifting from light to darkness is morning and evening in the mountains. In spring, blooming Howers send forth a delicate fragrance; in summer, the nourishing trees afford deep shades; in autumn, the sky is high and crisp, and the frost, snowy white; in winter, the water of the creek recedes and the bare bedrock emerges. These arc the mountain scenes in the four seasons. Going to the mountain in the morning and returning home in the evening and enjoying the beauties of the mountain in different seasons is a delight beyond description!
Carriers arc singing all along the way, and pedestrians are taking rest beneath the trees. Some are shouting from the fore and are answered by others from behind. There are hunchbacked old folks, and children led by their elders. They are people from Chuzhou who have come here in an endless stream. Some are fishing by the creek where the water is deep and the fish arc big. The water itself is faintly scented and the wine brewed from it is crystal clear. Upon the prefect’s banquet tabic is a sundry layer of dishes, including the meal of wild beasts and the flavorings of edible mountain herbs. The joy of the feast lies not in the musical accompaniment of strings or flutes, but in winning the games, such as throwing arrows into the vessel, or chess playing. Wine cups and gambling chips lay scattered in blithe disarray. The revelers, now sitting, now standing, cavort madly among themselves. These are the prefect's guests, and the old man with wizened face and white hair among them, who is half drunk, is none other than the prefect himself.
As dusk falls, one sees shifting shadows scattering in all directions. The prefect is leaving for home, and his guests are following him. The shadows of the trees are deepening, and birds are chirping high and low. The people arc going home, leaving the birds free to enjoy themselves. The birds only know their joy in the wooded mountains, but are unaware of what makes the people
joyful. The people only know that they are joyful on their excursion with the prefect, but are unaware that the prefect finds his joy in seeing them joyful. He, who enjoys himself with the people when drunk, and records this excursion in writing when sober, is the prefect himself. And who is the prefect? He is Ouyang Xiu of Luling.
77

答司馬諫議書
楊憲益戴乃迭
Reply to a Letter from Counsellor Sima Guang
Wang Anshi
Greetings from Wang Anshi:
Yesterday I had the honour to receive your instructions. We have long been acquainted and on a friendly footing, yet it seems to me that we usually disagree in our deliberations because the lines we take are fundamentally different. Much as I would have liked to argue my case at length, I knew you would never accept it; that is why I simply acknowledged your letter briefly instead of justifying myself point by point. In view, however, of the high regard you have shown me, I have since reflected that such a cursory reply was inappropriate. So I crave your indulgence now, sir, for explaining my views in more detail.
What scholars dispute most hotly is whether or not names accord with reality. Once the relationship between these is clear, we can grasp the principles governing all things in the universe.
However, sir, you now reproach me for causing a great uproar throughout the country by infringing on the prerogatives of officials, fomenting trouble, practicing extortion, and rejecting advice.
But I consider that when I receive orders from the Emperor to discuss certain laws and measures and have them amended at court, then passed on to the offices concerned, this cannot be called infringing on the prerogatives of officials. When I revive the policies of kings of old to benefit the country and do away with abuses, this cannot be called fomenting trouble. When I regulate the empire's finances, this cannot be called extortion. When I refuse vicious talk and rebut sophists, this cannot be called rejecting advice.
As for the widespread uproar, this is something which I had foreseen in advance. People have been used to blundering on for some time and most of the gentry think it best to ignore affairs of state, swim with the tide and curry favour with the multitude. Now the Emperor wishes to change this and, not caring how many my opponents are, I am eager to do my utmost to help him stem the tide; so naturally this has raised a storm of protests. When Pan Geng (1) moved his capital it caused a great clamour among the whole populace, not merely among court officials. But he did not because of this outcry change his plan, for he considered it correct and, having carried it out, saw no reason to regret it.
If you censure me because in my long term of office 1 have failed to do much to help the Emperor benefit the people, then I must plead guilty, sir. If you urge me to do nothing now but simply abide by the old ways, this is something I cannot venture to accept.
Having no chance to meet you, I can only send you my most respectful regards.
(I )A king of the Shang Dynasty (c. 1600-1066 BC) who moved his capital from present-day Qufu, where it was often flooded, to Anyang further south from the Yellow River.


題潮陽張許二公廟
Spring in a Pleasure Garden-Written in the Temple of Zhang Xun and Xu Yuan
If sons should die for filial piety
And ministers for loyalty,
What matters for us to be dead?
Our sacred land is torn in shreds,
No patriot could feel at ease,
Have loyal subjects done what they ought to?
How could my righteous wrath appease?
Zhang Xun, whom the rebels could not subdue,
And Xu Yuan were loyal to the crown;
They’ve left an undying renown.
Those who come after them should feel
The lack of their loyal zeal,
And they should be hardened into steel.
Life will soon pass away like a flickering flame;
A man should work, shine or rain,
With all his might and main.
If Zhang and Xu had fallen to the foe,
They would have borne the blame,
And down in history their names could never go.
Their temple gloomy at the forest’s side,
Their statues, awe-inspiring, dignified,
How many times have they been worshipped when crows fly
Over old trees and the setting sun kindles the sky!
Should a traitor pass by,
Let him open his eye!

後赤壁賦
潘正英
The Second Trip to the Red Cliffs
Su Shih
In the same year on the 15th of the moon, I was walking hack from the Snow Hall to the Ling Kao Tower, accompanied by two guests. We passed over the yellow muddy slope. The dew and frost had begun to fall, the tree-leaves had all shed. Human shadows were casting on the ground. We saw the bright moon up in the sky. Being filled with joy at this, we sang in response to one another as we walked along. Then I heaved a sigh, saying: “Either we have guests but no wine; or we have wine but no delicacies. The moon is bright, the air is refreshing; what shall we do with such a beautiful night?” One of the guests said: “This evening we cast net, and got some fish with big mouth and fine scales like the perch of the Pine river; but where shall we obtain wine?” Upon reaching home 1 discussed with my wife, and she said: “I have one peck of wine which I have stored long for your casual need.” Then with wine and fish we took another trip below the Red Cliffs, the flowing river gave a murmuring sound. The cliffs on the riverside rose to a height of one thousand feet. The moon appeared small above the high mountains, and the rocks exposed their bases as the water fell low. It was only a few months since; now the mountain and river were hardly recognizable!
Holding up my robe I went ashore, trod over the rugged rocks and made way through the entwining thickets. I seated myself upon the tiger-shaped rocks, or climbed upon the dragon-like trees; got up to the lofty nest of the perching falcon, or overlooked the deep darkish palace of Neptune: my guests could hardly follow up. I made a long sharp whistle. The grass and trees
81
trembled. The mountains and valleys rang with echoes. The wind rose and the water surged. I felt so sad at heart and sorely afraid that, being terror-struck, I could stay no longer. Then we returned to the boat, got to the midstream, and let it rest where it listed.
Shortly before midnight when all was still around, behold, there came a lone crane across the river from the east, it had two wings like cart-wheels, with the lower part in blue and the upper part in white. The bird gave a long cackle as it flitted past our boat to the west. Soon the guests departed, and I also went to sleep. I dreamed of a Taoist who, clad in feather robe, moved glidingly below the Ling Kao Tower. He addressed me with a salute, and asked me if I had a pleasant trip at the Red Cliffs. I asked his name, but he bending his head would not answer me. “Ah! I understand.” I said, “Last night was it not you that flew singing past me?” The Taoist smiled as he looked at me, and I was also aroused from sleep with a start. I opened the door and looked about, but there was no such place to be seen.

羅經國
The Second Ode on the Red Cliff
Su Shi
On the fifteenth of the tenth month of that year (1)1 walked from Xuetang (2) to Lingao (3). I crossed Huangniban (4) in the company of two friends. The frost had long since set in, and the leaves on all the trees had fallen. Our shadows were cast on the ground and the moon was bright in the sky. We took in the pleasurable scenery and while walking, each composed poems to match those by others. After a while, I said with a sign, "I have friends but no wine. Even if I had wine, I would still lack dishes. As the moon is bright and the wind is refreshing, how should we spend the enjoyable evening?" A friend answered, "I have just netted a fish at dusk. It looks like the perch of Songjiang (5) with a big mouth and fine scales. But where can I get wine?" I went home and discussed the matter with my wife. She said, "I have kept some wine for a long time for just such an unexpected need."
My friends and I rowed the boat back to the foot of the Red Cliff, carrying the fish and the wine with us. The river gurgled between cliffs that rose a thousand feet high on either side. The moon looked small over the lofty mountains. Where the river rapids had receded, rocks came into view. In the lapse of a little time the mountains and the water had changed beyond recognition! Holding up my long gown, 1 went ashore, stepped on the steep precipices, cutting through overgrown weeds, squatting on rocks in the shape of tigers and leopards, and climbing aged trees with gnarled branches like dragons. I scaled the height where fierce wild birds nested, and looking downwards, I saw in the water the palace where the water god dwelled. My two friends dared not follow me to my rocky perch. All of a sudden I gave a long howl. The sound reverberated in the valleys and
82
shook the trees and grass. A strong wind rose and waves surged up. I felt secretly sad and scared. Apprehensively 1 realized that it was too frightening to remain there. I returned to the boat, letting it pursue its own course on the river, and rested wherever it took us.
It was about midnight and all around us was silence. Just then a lone crane flew across the river from the cast. The upper part of its body looked as if dressed in white and the lower part, in black. Its stretched wings were like flying wheels. With a long cry it flitted over our boat and headed westward. Presently my friends left and I went to bed. In my drcam I met a Taoist priest dressed in a gown made of birds’ feathers, he carried a debonair manner about him. He was passing my house and made a bow to me with hands clasped. "Did you have a good time at the Red Cliff?" asked he. I asked his name, but he lowered his head in silence. "Ah, I know," said I. "Wasn't it you who flitted by me last night with a loud cry?" He gave no response beyond a smile. I was awakened from the dream. Opening the gate, I saw no trace of him.
(l)This piece of writing was written in the same year (1082) that Su Shi wrote "The First Ode on the Red Cliff”.
(2)A house Su Shi built on the eastern slope near his dwelling place in Lingao.
(3)Lingao is in the south of Huanggang County, Hubei Province.
(4)Huangniban is a mountain slope near Lingao.
(5)Songjiang is today's Songjiang County, part of the City of Shanghai.

石鍾山記
羅經國
The Stone Bell Mountain
Su Shi
It is said in Shui Jing (1) that at the mouth of the Pengli (2) Lake is the Stone Bell Mountain. Geologist Li Yuan (3) assumed that there was a deep pond at the base of the mountain, and that the hollow chime of a big bell was created by the waves beating against the mountain rocks in a gentle wind. However, there are those who view his theory with disbelief. If a bell or a stone qing (4), let alone a solid rock, is put into the water, even the watery bombardment of a tempest cannot induce it to ring.
Then Li Bo (5) in the Tang dynasty, following Li Yuan's footsteps, came to the site and found two "rocks" resting on the bank of the pond. When struck with a drumstick, the southern rock sounded dull and indistinct whereas the northern one rang with crystalline clarity. When the striking stopped, the sound lingered for quite a while. Li Bo thought that he had discovered the mountain's secret. But 1 doubt the truth of his discovery. There are rocks everywhere that make random sounds when struck by man. Why is that mountain so special as to warrant the name "Stone Bell"? On the ninth day of June in the seventh year of Yuanfeng (6), I went by boat from Qi'an to Linru (7). It happened that, Su Mei, my eldest son, was going to take up the office of magistrate in Dexing County of Raozhou (8). I accompanied him to Hukou (9) so that we had the opportunity of
84
seeing the so-called "Stone Bell". A monk of a Buddhist temple sent a boy to find some rocks in a jumble of mountain rocks and strike them with an ax. They rang with a hollow sound, and I smiled with skepticism. At nightfall, my son and I rowed a boat to the foot of the precipice in the bright moonlight. Its stone face reared up before us, rising a thousand feet above the pond, like some predatory beast or monstrous behemoth poised to engulf us. A gu, a kind of fierce bird, was startled from reset by our voice, flew up with a squawking sound towards the sky. Then a sound like the coughing and laughing of an old man echoed through the misty valley. "It is the cry of a water bird," the boatman said. A chill of fear crept over me. Just as I began to give leave for our return, a thundering chorus of unseen bells, arose from the water and continued without cease. The boatman was terrified. I looked around and saw that the rocks at the foot of the precipice were full of crevices and cavities of unknown depths, from which this sound issued when the scourging waves surged and reverberated among them. On the way back, our boat followed a winding course nestled between two mountains. Before we entered the harbor, I spotted a huge rock standing in midstream. It is so big that about one hundred persons could sit on it. It was hollow and had many cavities. Wind and water swept in and out of them, making pounding sounds like the striking of the bell and beating of the drum, in almost deliberate counterpart to the previous sound. I said to my son with a smile, "Do you know that the first sound is called 'Wushe', after the sound produced by a bell cast during the reign of Emperor Jing of the Zhou Dynasty (10), and that the second sound resembled that produced by the 'Music Bell' given to Wei Jiang by a prince of the Kingdom of Jin (11)? It seems that the ancient people did not deceive us by calling this mountain the Stone Bell Mountain."
Is it right for one to assume that something exists without seeing or hearing it on one's own? Li Yuan saw and heard about the same things as I did, but he did not write a detailed description of the scene. The scholar bureaucrats did not discover the true cause of the sound because they were
loath to visit the precipice by boat at night. And although the fishermen and the boatmen knew the reason, they could not write it down. This explains why most people were denied the knowledge of why the mountain was so named. They were pleased to explain the phenomenon by striking the rocks with an ax. 1 recorded this experience to show that I felt sorry for the sketchiness of Li Yuan's description and could not help laughing at Li Bo's inept efforts.
1)	Shui Jing is a book of geology, written in either the Han Dynasty or the Jin Dynasty.
2)	The Pengli Lake is the Poyang Lake, located in the northern part of Jiangxi Province.
3)	Li Yuan is another name for Li Daoyuan,a geologist in the Northern Wei Dynasty. He was said to be the one who made detailed notes on Shui Jing.
4)	Qing is said to be a percussion instrument.
85
5)	Li Bo was a scholar of the Tang Dynasty, not to be mistaken for Li Bai, the famous poet of the Tang Dynasty.
6)	Yuanfeng was the title of Emperor Shengzong's reign of the Song Dynasty. The seventh year of
Yuanfeng was 1084.
7)	Qi'an is a county in Hubci Province. Linru, a county in Henan Province.
8)	Dexing County is in today's Jiangxi Province where the Stone Bell Mountain is located.
9)	Hukou was today's Hukou County, Jiangxi Province where the Stone Bell Mountain is located.
10)	The date of the reign of Emperor Jing of the Zhou Dynasty was 544 B.C-520 B.C. In the twenty-fourth years of his reign he had the bell "Wushe" cast.
11)Wei Jiang was an official of the Kingdom of Jin during the reign of the Spring and Autumn Period. It is recorded in history that the ruler of the Kingdom of Zheng gave two sets of brilliant bells to the prince of Jin, who sent one set to Wei Jiang.

林語堂
Stone Bell Mountain
The Classic of Water says: "At the mouth of Pengli stands the Stone Bell Mountain." Its commentator Li Daoyuan(died A.D. 527) states that "there is a deep water at its foot, where the winds and waves striking the rocks make a sound like that of great bells."
People often discredit this statement, for bells and musical stones submerged in waves do not make such a sound, not to speak of rocks. Not until the Tang Period did Li Bo visit the place, where he found two rocks from the water. When struck with a wooden handle, they made a clanging sound, dying away gradually like bells, one in a clearer and the other in a muffled tone. He thought he had thus verified the origin of the name. But I had my doubts, for there are certainly rocks which make a ringing sound when struck, but these were said to make sounds like bells.
In June 1084, I was making a voyage from Qi'an to Linru, and my eldest son, and thus we had no opportunity to visit it and see the stone bells. A monk sent a boy to show us. The boy took an ax and struck at some of the rocks near by at random, but there was nothing unusual about the dull thuds. I gave up for hearsay and laughed.
That night, however, there was a bright moon, and I took a boat with Mai to the foot of the mountain. The river here was flanked by a high cliff almost a thousand feet high. As seen in the moonlight, the rocks looked very much like some weird monsters or dark spirits in frightening postures. The hawks nesting above flew up with raucous cries upon hearing our approach. There was another noise like an old man coughing chortling somewhere in the air. We were told that this came from a species of cranes. I was quite moved and was thinking of turning back when a great noise came over the waters, booming and whining like drums and bells, which quite frightened the
86
boatman.
Upon close examination, I found that at the foot of the cliff were a number of stone caves of unknown depth. When the waves hit the caves, it made that roaring, surging noise. On turning back past Hanshan, al the point where the lake waters joined the big river, there was a huge rock in the middle of the stream, big enough to hold a hundred people. This huge boulder was full of holes and hollows, and the winds and waters sucking through them swish-swashed and make a booming noise, which joined with the clanging from the water caves to make such a symphony.
I said to my son: "Mai, you see. That clanging from the caves will help you to understand the mention in history book of the sound of the bells of the Emperor Jing of Zhou Dynasty, and the boom will help you to appreciate the description of the orchestra bells of Wei Zhuangzi. Evidently, what the ancient books tell us is true."
One is often inclined to doubt ancient records until one personally sees these things. Li Daoyuan must have seen what we have seen, but he was not very explicit. The scholars usually would not take the trouble to take a boat to the foot of the cliff, so they could not have known. The boatmen know about it, of course, but they do not record it in books. Li Bo verified it only superficially by knocking at a couple of rocks on land, and he never really found out where the sounds came from.
I write this down, to show that Li Daoyuan did not say enough and Li Bo did not know enough.
汪榕培
The Stone Bell Hill
According to The Book of Waters, at the mouth of the Pengli Lake stands a hill named Stone Bell. Li Daoyuan explains in his annotation, "The base of the hill reaches a deep pond. Stirred by the breeze, the rippling of waves onto the stones sounds like the ringing of huge bells."
There has been a widespread skepticism about this view. Placed in the waters, a bell or a stone chime will never ring in the stormiest waves, let alone the hill-stones! Li Bo in the Tang Dynasty was the first to explore the site. When he struck two stones from the lakeshore, the one from the south hill sounded dull and muffled compared to the one from the north hill, which sounded clear and rich with a lasting resonation. He thought that he had ascertained the origin of this hill's name. However, 1 have harbored more suspicion about this view. Since resounding stones can be found everywhere, why is this hill alone named "Bell"?
On the ninth day of the sixth month by the lunar calendar in the seventh year during the Yuanfeng reign (1084), 1 was taking a boat from Qi'an to Linru while my eldest son Su Mai was going to take office as the county magistrate in Dcxing County, Raozhou Prefecture. On my way to see him off to Hukou, 1 had the opportunity to see the "Stone Bell" hill. When the bonze told a boy to strike at a couple of stones in the rubbles to emit thumping sounds, I frankly laughed it away.
87
In the bright moonlight after dusk, I took a small boat with Su Mai and came under the cliff. By my side towered a thousand-foot rock, as if a wild beast or exotic demon were threatening to jump at us; startled by my approach, falcons nesting on the hill took sudden flights, hooting amid the clouds; cranes whooped and chuckled like old men in the ravine. I was about to return in apprehension when a roar came from the waters, pealing and rumbling like the bells and drums, while the boatman showed signs of great horror.
As I looked closely, I detected nooks and crannies around the hill-base. I did not know the depth, but the noise surely came from the lapping and swirling of waters in them. When the boat came between the hills and approached the wharf, I noticed a colossal reef in the midstream, spacious enough to hold a hundred people. The numerous crevices in the hollow reef inhaled and exhaled wind and water, thumping and ringing to echo the previous pealing and rumbling, as if in a harmonious music.
I said to Su Mai with a smile, "Have you kept it in your mind? The thumping and ringing seem to come from the Wuyi Bell owned by King Jing of the Zhou Dynasty; the pealing and rumbling seem to come from the stringed chime owned by Wei Zhuangzi of the Jin State. People in the past did not hoax us with the name of 'Stone Bell'!"
Can we draw groundless conclusions without seeing or hearing by ourselves? Li Daoyuan saw and heard a similar sight as I, but his narrative was too rough; the scholar-bureaucrats could not get at the truth because they would not moor their boats under a cliff at night; the fishermen and boatmen knew the fact, but they could not write it down to make it known to the world; the shallow people struck at the stones with axes and presumed that they knew the answer. Therefore, I have written down my experience to regret Li Daoyuan's oversimplification and deride Li Bo's ignorance.
宜立敦
Stone Bells Mountain
The Guide to Waterways states, "At the mouth of Lake Peng-li stands Stone Bells Mountain." Li Tao-yuan believed that "where the foot of the mountain meets the deep lake, a slight breeze stirs up the waves so that the water strikes the rocks, producing sounds like that of great bells." People have often doubted this explanation. Recently, some bells and chimes were placed in the middle of the water, and although a strong wind stirred up the waves, they did not emit any sounds. So how could this be true of the rocks? Li Po of the Tang was the first to travel to the site, and he found a pair of rocks protruding from the lake. "I struck them and listened," he wrote. "The one to the south sounded deep and turbid, the one to the north had a high, clear pitch. After they were struck, the sounds continued to reverberate as the vibrations slowly faded."
88
On the day ding-chou in the sixth month of the seventh year of the Yuan-feng era [July 14, 1084], I took a boat from Chi-an to Lin-ru, and because my son Mai was on his way to Te-hsing in Rao Prefecture to serve as magistrate, I saw him off as far as Hu-kou. So I was able to view the so-called Stone Bells. A Buddhist monk had a boy bring along an ax and strike one or two of the scattered rocks. They gave off a dull thud — "hung-hung" — and I laughed in disbelief. In the evening when the moon shone brightly, I went with Mai alone in a small boat to the foot of the cliff. The huge rock rose slanting up a thousand chi, resembling a ferocious beast or a strange demon, terrifying as if it was about to seize one. The perching falcons on the mountaintop were startled by the sound of humans, and their piercing cries —"che-chc" — rang out through the sky. And then there were sounds like an old man yelling and laughing in a canyon. Someone said, "That must be a crane." I had just begun to feel uneasy and wanted to return when loud sounds were emitted on the surface of the water, booming "tseng-tseng" like continuous bells or drums. The boatman was frightened. We slowly approached to investigate and found that at the foot of the mountain were grottoes and fissures in the rock. I could not tell how deep they were, but it was the small waves which entered, surged around, and crashed against each other that were causing this sound.
As the boat returned, it passed between two mountains and was about to enter the harbor. There was a huge rock standing in the middle of the current, which could accommodate a hundred people seated. It was hollow inside, and it also had many holes in it. It swallowed and spit out the wind the water, giving off ringing sounds — "kuan-kan tang-ta" — as the water struck it. It seemed to reply to the booming sound we had previously heard, just like a musical performance. I laughed and said to Mai, "Do you recognize this? The booming sound is the bell Wu-I of King Ching of the Chou dynasty, and the ringing sounds are the Singing Bells of Wei Hsien-tzu. The
ancients have not deceived me!"
Should one arbitrarily decide about the existence of something without personally investigating it? Li Tao-yuan probably witnessed what I did, but his description was vague. Since gentlemen would never moor a small boat at the foot of a sheer cliff at night, none of them could know about it. Fishermen and boatmen may have known, but they could not express it. This is why the facts have not been transmitted by my contemporaries. Moreover, an unintelligent person investigated it by striking it with an ax, and thought that he had found the truth. I have written this down because I regret Li Tao-yuan's simplicity and laugh at Li Po's shallowness.
89

凌虛台記
羅經國
The Towering Terrace
Shu Shi
At the foot of the Zhongnan Mountain, the daily lives of the city people seemed inseparable from the mountain. Of the mountains around the cities, none were as high as the Zhongnan mountain, and, of the cities nearby, none were as close to the Zhongnan Mountain as Fufeng County (1). Needless to say, Fufeng County, because of its close proximity to the Mountain, was the best place to view its summit. But the prefect did not know that the Mountain was there. Thought this oversight did not impact the prefect's government affairs, it defied common sense. This was the reason why the Towering Terrace was built.
Before he constructed the Terrace, Prefect Chen used to stroll leisurely about the foot of the mountain, with a stick in hand. He noticed the mountain peaks rising one after another over the tops of the trees like knots of hair on the heads of passerby, as seen from within the walls of the courtyard. He noted, "There is something remarkable about this place." He therefore ordered that a pond be dug, and with the excavated earth, he built a terrace that surrounded the very eaves of his estate. Then the visitors who ascended the Terrace were confounded at the height of the Terrace, thinking that they were standing on a hill newly sprung from a vigorously active mountain. With pride, Prefect Chen said, "It should be named the Towering Terrace." and asked his subordinate
91
Su Shi to write an account of its creation.
Su Shi replied, "It is beyond man's ability to predict the rise and fall of the affairs in the world. This place used to be a wilderness choked with weeds, blanketed by frost and frequented by foxes and poisonous snakes. Who could then tell where would be a Towering Terrace? A rise is always followed by a fall, in an eternal cycle for balance. Thus no one can tell when the Towering Terrace will turn into wilderness again. I have ascended this Terrace with you, and have observed the landscape. To its east were the Qinian Palace and Tuoquan Palace of King Mu of the Qing Dynasty (2); to its south were Changyang Palace and the Wuzuo Palace of Emperor Wu of the Han Dynasty; and to its north were the Renshou Palace of the Sui Dynasty and the Jiucheng Palace of the Tang Dynasty. In the prime of their prosperity, their magnificence, splendor and unshakable stability surpassed the Terrace by no less than a hundredfold. But in a few generations, it became impossible to imagine their former wonder, for even the broken tiles and rubble no longer existed. They were supplanted by crop-growing fields and thorny hills. What of this simple Terrace? We cannot even trust the Terrace to last forever, let alone human affairs! One's life is marked by vicissitudes, drifting from gain to loss and from success to failure. It would be wrong to take pride in one's good fortune, and be self-complacent, for there are many other things in the world which we may count on. Why should we mind the survival or extinction of a Terrace?" After this talk with Prefect Chen, I went home and put it down in writing.
(l)Fufeng County is now Fengxiang County, Shaanxi Province. Su Shi worked for two years under Chen Xiliang, the prefect of the county.
(2)The name of Qinian Palace, built by King Mu of the State of Qin during the Spring and Autumn Period, was changed into the Tuoquan Palace when King Xiao Came to the throne.

五人墓碑記
楊憲益戴乃迭
A Record for the Five Men’s Tomb
These five men died for their just action at the time of Mr Zhou Shunchang’s (1) arrest. Now some worthy gentlemen of our prefecture have obtained permission from the authorities to bury them in the place where once stood the Temple of the Eunuch Wei, now demolished, and to erect a stone at the entrance to the tomb to commemorate them. This is admirable. Only eleven months have passed since the death of these five men and their burial in this tomb. During these successful careerists, to say nothing of nameless folk in the countryside, have been struck down and killed by disease and straightaway forgotten. Why then do these five men outshine all others?
I still remember Mr Zhou's arrest, on the fifteenth of the third month last year (2). The leading scholars of our society (3), eager to champion justice, raised money to see him off. The sound of lamentations shook heaven and earth. When mounted guards advanced with drawn swords to challenge the mourners, the crowd goaded beyond endurance beat them down. The imperial censor and inspector-general of Suzhou at that time was a million of Wei Zhongxian and responsible for Mr Zhou’s arrest. When he tried to intimidate the citizens of Shuzhou in their distress, they raised such an uproar that he only escaped by hiding in a privy. He reported this riot in Suzhou to the court and had five men condemned to death, namely, Yan Peiwei, Yang Nianru, Ma Jie, Shen Yang and Zhou Wenyuan, who have now been buried together. These five men faced their execution gallantly, cursing the censor by name and chatting and laughing together before they died. When their heads were displayed on the citadel, none of them had changed countenance. Some worthy gentlemen bought the five men’s heads for fifty taels of silver and carried them off in a casket to restore them to the corpses. So now the five bodies in the tomb are whole.
During the havoc caused by the chief eunuch, pitifully few officials within the whole realm were able to retain their integrity. Yet these five men from common families, with no education in the classics, stood up for justice and met death without flinching. How can we account for this? When the eunuch went on to forge imperial decrees and arrest "confederates" all over the empire, he dared not victimize our prefecture further because we had fought back. It was, indeed, fear of this just indignation which made him hesitate to carry out his treasonous plot; and then, when our sage sovereign ascended the throne, he hanged himself by the roadside. Part of the credit for this undoubtedly belongs to these five men.
Judging by this, once great lords in high positions are in trouble they will try to run away or, unable to find a refuge anywhere, will become monks, live as recluses or feign madness. How can their despicable behavior compare with the death of these five men? Thus Mr Zhou Shunchang proved his loyalty and justice to the court so that he won fame after death and was honoured with posthumous titles. These five men, too, received due burial and have their names inscribed on the dyke where passersby from every side will one and all play their respects and lament for them. Only once in a hundred generations does such a thing happen. Had these five men not been beheaded but grown old and lived out the full span of their lives at home, they would have been treated as slaves; nor would brave and eminent men come here, heart-stricken, to mourn at these martyrs’ graves. The members of our society thought it a pity that there was only a stone tablet at the tomb, and so we have made this record. Also to show that in the momentous issues of life and death, common citizens may do the country a great service.
With acknowledgements to these worthy gentlemen: Mr Wu Yinzhi, Master of the Imperial Equipage; Mr Wen Wenqi, Imperial Historian; and Mr Yao Mengchang.
94
(I )Zhou Shunchang of Suzhou who offended the chief eunuch Wei Zhongxian and died in prison.
(2)Thc seventh year of the reign of Tianqi, 1627.
(3)The Donglin Society.
項脊軒志
楊憲益戴乃迭
The Nape
Gui Youguang
The south passageway from our sidedoor known as the “Nape” is barely ten square feet, just big enough to serve as a room for one. Our house is a hundred years old. Dust used to fall and rain to drip through the ceiling, and I could find nowhere else to move my desk. Moreover, facing north and getting no sun, the room grew dark after noon. I patched it up so that it no longer leaked, opened windows in front and built a wall south of the courtyard to reflect the sunlight and brighten up the place. I also planted orchids, cassias and bamboos, showing off the old balustrades to better advantage. My shelves are piled with books, and here I rest and sing or sit quietly listening to the sounds all around in the stillness of the courtyard. Small birds alighting in search of food do not
96
fly off at the approach of men, and when a full moon casts its bright light over half the wall the mottled shadows of the cassia trees stir in the wind with a dappled loveliness.
For me this place has happy occasions as well as sad ones. The north and south buildings were formerly connected, but my uncles divided up the house, adding various small walls and doors here and there, so that a dog on the cast side barks at the west side, to enter the dining-room guests
have to pass the kitchen, and hens roost in the hall. First fences were huilt in the courtyard, later walls, renovated more than once. An old family maid used to stay in this little chamber. Because she had been my grandmother's maid and nurse in our house for two generations, my mother showed her special consideration. Her chamber opened into the inner apartments and my mother sometimes visited her there. This old nurse told me where my mother had stood, recalling, “When your elder sister was crying in my lap, your mother would tap on the door and ask, 'Is the child cold? Docs she want to be fed?' And I would answer through the wooden door.” Before she finished my eyes were wet, and hers, too.
One day, after I have bound up my hair and started studying in this chamber, my grandmother came in to me and said, “Child, I haven't seen so much as your shadow for days. Why shut yourself up here all the time, quiet as a girl?” On leaving, as she closed the door she mused, “The men of our family have studied all these years without success, but perhaps this child will get somewhere." So she came back with an ivory tablet and told me, “My grandfather carried this tablet when he went to court as officer of ceremony. Who knows but some day you may use it?” It seems just like yesterday when I look at these relics, the sight of which now sets me weeping, unable to stop.
There used to be a kitchen east of this chamber, and as time went by I learned to recognize the steps of the passersby behind closed doors. Four times the place caught fire but was never destroyed, as if under the protection of kindly spirits.
The Master of the Nape comments: Widow Qing of Sichuan, who kept a cinnabar mine, was the richest women in the land — the First Emperor of Qin built a tower to commemorate her. When Liu Bei and Cao Cao were contesting for power, Zhuge Liang arose in Longzhong. Yet while the widow and the wise man were staying quietly in their different corners, the world knew nothing of
them. My content in this shabby room, where I hold forth with dancing eyebrows and sparkling eyes on the wonders around me, must remind those who know me of the proverbial frog in the well. That is why 1 have made this record.
Five years later, my wife came to our house. She often slipped into this chamber to ask about bygone days or practise her writing at my desk. Returning from a visit to her family, she told me her younger sister wanted to know, “What is that passageway we hear your house has?” Six years
97
later my wife died, I let the place go to ruin. After another two years, lying ill for months with nothing much to do, I got men to rebuild this south passageway with some slight changes. But since then my frequent absences from home have rarely allowed me to stay here. The loquat tree which I planted in the courtyard the year that my wife died has grown up now to give shade.

滿井游記
楊憲益戴乃迭
A Trip to Manjing
Yuan Hongdao
It is very cold in the former State of Yan (I). After the Flower Festival (2), the cold is still piercing and icy winds spring up, swirling sand through the air, rolling pebbles and confining you to your room, though you want to go out. If you venture out in spite of the wind, before taking a hundred steps you will beat a retreat.
On the twenty-second, the weather turned a little mild, so with a few friends, 1 went out of Dongzhimen Gate to Manjing (3). There the dike was lined with tall willows and the fertile soil was slightly damp. In front of that open expanse, I felt like a wild swan that had escaped from a cage. The ice over the water had begun to thaw and ripples showed like overlapping fish scales. The water was so clear that you could see to the bottom, as dazzling as a newly opened mirror or the cold gleam of a sword just drawn from its sheath. Ranges of hills washed by fleecy clouds had a sheen as if polished. Fresh and radiant, they resembled beautiful girls with their faces newly washed, their hair just dressed. The tender-tips of willows about to burgeon were swaying in the wind. The wheat sprouts in the fields were about an inch in height. Though it was not the peak season for sightseers, some people were sipping tea beside the spring or singing with a wine-pot in their hands, and gaily dressed women on donkeys could be seen from time to time. Though the wind was still strong, walking made you break into a sweat. Birds basking in the sun on sandbanks and fish sipping the water were all carefree and content; all furred, feathered and finny creatures were full of joy. It dawned on me that it wasn’t that spring hadn’t come in the suburbs, but that the townsfolk were unaware of this.
Mine is the only official post in which sightseeing will not hold up one’s work; thus I can enjoy myself among hills, rocks and plants. Besides, this place happens to be near my residence. Since
this is my first outing, how can I neglect to record it? Hence I have written these notes in the second month of the twenty-seventh year of the reign of Wanli (4).
(l)One of the Warring States (475-221 BC), present-day north Hebei Province.
(2)On the twelfth of the second month by the lunar calendar.
(3)In the suburbs of Beijing
(4)1599

西湖七月半
林語堂
Harvest Moon on West Lake
Chang Tai
There is nothing to see during the moon on West Lake |Hangchow). All you can see are people who come out to see the moon. Briefly there are five categories of these holidaymakers. First there are those who come out in the name of looking at the harvest moon but never even take a look at it: the people who expensively dressed, sit down at gorgeous dinners with music in brightly illuminated boats or villas in a confusion of light and noise. Secondly, those who do sit in the moonlight but never look at it: ladies, daughters of high families in boats and towers also handsome boys (homosexuals) who sit in open spaces and giggle and chatter and look at other people. Thirdly, boat parties of famous courtesans and monks with time on their hands who enjoy a little sip and indulge in song and flute and string instruments. They are in the moonlight, too, and indeed look at the moon but want people to see them looking at the moon. Fourthly, there are the young men, who neither ride nor go into boats, but after a drink and a good dinner, rush about in their rowdy dress and seek the crowd at Chaoching and Tuanchiao where it is thickest, shouting, singing songs of no known melody and pretending to be drunk. They look at the moon, look at the
101
people looking at the moon, and also look at those not looking at the moon, but actually see nothing. Lastly, there are those who hire a small boat, provided with a clay stove and a clean table and choice porcelain cups and pots, and who get into the boat with a few friends and their sweethearts; they hide under a tree or row out into the Inner Lake in order to escape from the crowd, and look at the moon without letting people see that they are looking at the moon and even without consciously looking at it.
The local Hangchow people come out on the lake, if they do at all, between eleven in the morning and eight in the evening, as if they had morbid fear of the moon. But on this night, they all come out in groups, in the hope of getting good tips. The sedan chair carriers line up on the bank. The moment they get into a boat, they tell the boatman to hurry and row across to the Tuanchiao area, and get lost in the crowd, therefore in that area before the second watch [ten o'clock] the place is filled with noise and music bands in a weird, boiling confusion, like a roaring sea or a landside, or a nightmare, or like Bedlam let loose, with all the people in it rendered deaf and dumb for the moment. Large and small boats are lied up along the bank, and one can see nothing except boats creaking against boats, punting poles knocking punting poles, shoulders rubbing shoulders, and faces looking at faces. Soon the feasting is over, the officials leave, the yamen runners shout to clear the way, the sedan chair carriers scream for fare, the boatmen give warning that the city gates will soon be closed. A grand procession of torches and lanterns, with swarms of retainers passes on. Those on land also hurry to get into the city before the closing of the gate, and very soon almost the entire crowd is gone.
Only then do we move the boat to Tuanchiao. The rocks have become cool by this time, and we spread a mat on the ground and invite ourselves to a great drink. At this time the moon looks like a newly polished mirror, the hills appear draped in a new dress, and the face of lake is like a lady after a fresh make-up. Those who have been hiding themselves under a tree and enjoying a quiet
sip come out now also. We exchange names and invite them to join us. There we have charming friends and famous courtesans; cups and chopsticks are in place, and songs and music begin, in the chilly dream world of moonlight. The party breaks up at dawn, and we get into the boat again and move it into the miles of lotus-covered surface, where we catch a nap in an air filled with its fragrance, and have a perfect sleep.

祭妹文
謝百魁
Lament for My Younger Sister
Yuan Mei
In the winter of the year Dinghai of the Qianlong period, I buried my third younger sister Suwen on Mount Yangshan of Shangyuan County and consecrated the burial with this threnodical writing:
Alas! You, bom in Zhejiang, arc buried here, separated from our native place by seven hundred li. Although I like to dream and fancy, how could I know that this world be the burial ground of your remains?
Dictated by your idea of chastity and fidelity, you married an unworthy husband, and having been deserted by him, led a precarious, helpless and lonely life. Destined by fate, it was in fact the handiwork of Providence. But after all, I could hardly avoid the blame for having brought you to this pass. In my childhood I was instructed by my tutor in Confucian scriptures. During the lessons you sat with me shoulder to shoulder, and were fond of listening to the stories about the heroic and righteous martyrdom of the ancients. Having grown up, you hastened to follow their examples. Alas, supposing that you had been ignorant of the scriptures, you might not have carried your chastity and fidelity to such a degree!
Once when I was catching a cricket, you flung your little arms about and helped me gladly with my effort. In the winter the insect became stiff and dead, we buried it in its tiny grave. Now I am laying you out and burying you, the scenes of that day are conjured up vividly before my eyes. One day when I was only nine, I was taking a rest in my study when you came in with your double chignons and in your sateen robe. Then we reviewed the passage of Ziyi in the Book of Odes. At that moment our tutor opened the door and heard us uttering some reading aloud; he could not help smiling and uttering some praises. This happened on the fifteenth of the seventh month and must be fresh in your memory even in the netherworld. When I had come of age and was leaving for Canton, you tugsed my dress and showed unfeigned grief. Three years later I returned with a
Jinshi rank, and you, leaning on a table, came out of the east chamber. The whole family stared at me and then beamed with a smile. I do not remember whence the conversation began—probably from my obtaining the exalted rank in the capital and the courier’s reporting it timely or not. All these trivialities, though things of the past, I shall never forget so long as I am alive. Filled with such recollections, my heart is choked with sorrow. For they are like a shadow which, however distinct, evades you the moment you try to catch it. 1 regret that I did not keep a detailed record of our infantile activities. Now that you are no more in this world, no one would bear witness to all these, even if time should retrograde and childhood be restored.
After you had rightly divorced your husband, our aged mother depended on you for support and all the paperwork was up to you to do. I used to say that of the womanhood those who were
104
enlightened on scriptural precepts and well versed in classical allusions were few. Your sister-in-law, though good-tempered and compliant, was somewhat deficient in this respect. Therefore, I was glad of your return, notwithstanding that 1 felt sad for your miserable plight. I was older than you by four years. The seniors are supposed to die earlier and I looked to you to be my posthumous trustee. I never thought that you should have passed away before me! Two years ago I was Ill. You inquired after me all through the nights, pleased with the least alleviation of my disease and worried over its slightest aggravation. Later, when I was a little better but was still bedridden, you came to my bedside, and told me, by way of my diversion, many amusing and amazing episodes from various anecdotes. Alas, henceforward, if I fall ill again, how am I to call for you?
Your disease I thought was not serious, as I believed the doctor's diagnosis. So I went as far as Yangzhou to visit the ancient monuments. Fearing lest you should make me alarmed, you prevented the messenger from reporting to me until you, being far gone in your disease, were on the verge of death. Mother asked, "Do you wish to have your brother back?" You answered quite reluctantly, "Well then." But I already dreamt the day before of your coming to bid me farewell. Taking it for an ill foreboding, I crossed the Yangtse as if by flight. Things happened as I had most dreaded. I returned just three hours after you had breathed your last. Your body remained lukewarm, with one eye not yet closed. This showed that you were prolonging your death agony to wait for me. Alas, how distressing it was! Had I known beforehand that I would be parted from you, I should not have gone far. Even if a long trip was impending, I had, however, so much confidence to share with you and so much to contrive with you before my departure. Now all is over! We shall never meet again, unless I die. Yet 1 have no idea when 1 shall die so as to see you. And, in the final analysis, it is still an enigma as to whether we shall have cognizance and reunion after death. Harbouring this everlasting remorse, I cry: O, Heaven, O man! Can it be true that all is
gone, never to return?
I have put your poems into print and have married off your daughter in your stead. Besides, I have written a sketch of your life. Only your tomb has not yet been properly devised. The cemetery of our ancestors is in Hangzhou. Obstructed by the deep and broad river, you cannot be buried there. Acting on Mother's instruction, I am laying you in peace at this place, it being convenient to render you offerings. Beside you is buried your daughter A Yin. Of the two graves lying below, one belongs to Zhu. Father's second wife, another to Tao, my second wife. Mount Yangshan, with a view of spacious and distant country, overlooks a tract of lowlands in the south and confronts Mount Qixia in the west. Swept by wind and rain in the obscurity of early morning, your wandering ghost will have its companions and feel no solitude. Pitiable am I myself. Since you
105
cried over your dead nephew in your dirge which I read in the year Wuyin, I have not had another son till now, and my two daughters arc still in the babbling stage, as they, born after your death, are only one year old. Mother is still alive, I dare not speak of my decrepitude. None the less, my teeth are shaky and my head is bald. I keep surreptitiously wondering how long I shall remain in the land of the living. Brother A Pin holds office far in Henan and also has no children. Among the kinsmen not a single one can claim to be our inheritor. Among the kinsmen not a single one can claim to be our inheritor. You died and I am burying you. When I die, who is to bury me? If you are really a ghost, can you answer me?
Alas, I cannot hope to see you again when I am alive. Nor can I be sure of being cognizant of you after I die. I lament over you, yet do not hear you speak; I make offerings to you, but do not see you eat. The paper ashes are swirling in a vehement north wind. I am leaving you for home, still turning my head to look at you. Welladay! Welladay!

登泰山記
謝百魁
Ascent to Mountain Tai
Yao Nai
On the south side of Mount Tai flows westward the River Wen, while on its north Hows the River Ji. The streams south of the mountain all pour into the former and those north of the mountain all pour into the latter. The dividing line between the north and the south is the Great Wall of ancient times and the highest peak Riguan is situated fifteen li south of it.
In the twelfth month of the thirty ninth year of the Qianlong period, I set out from the capital in a snowstorm, passing by the counties of Qihe and Changqing, then took my way through the northwest valleys of Mount Tai, and crossing the Great Wall, arrived at Tai'an. On the twenty-eighth of that month 1 started the ascent to the mountain from its south side, together with Zhu XIaochun, alias Ziying, the prefect. It was a climb of forty five li, the path being all paved with stone steps, altogether more than seven thousand in number. Right on the south side of the mountain the land was furrowed by three valleys. The middle one, with its water skirting Tai'an Town, was namely Huanshui as called by Li Daoyuan, the famous geographer. At the outset we followed the route along the middle valley. Having almost halved the way, we traversed the middle ridge, and bending towards the west valley, finally gained the summit. In olden times, people used to follow the route along the east valley, which was overlooked by Tianmen (the
107
Heavenly Gate), the valley was called ancients Tianmcnxishui, a place quite out of our way. The precipices standing in the way as we climbed via the middle ridge as well as the summit were called by people Heavenly Gates. The path was enshrouded in fog and was slippery for being crusted with ice, and we were almost unable to tread up the stone steps. But the moment we made the summit, we saw that the dark green mountain was laden with snow, and the sky in the south was suffused with its dazzling light. With the town bathed in the twilight of sunset, the River Wen and Culai Hills were picturesque, and the mountain was girded with a belt of fog.
On the last day of the twelfth month Zhu and I sat in Riguan Arbour before daybreak to wait for the sunrise in spite of the snow swirled up by a gale and striking us on the face. East of the arbour, right under our feet, the vacant space was all spread with clouds, in which several dozen cubes as white as dice were slightly visible. These proved to be the mountain tops. At the farthest horizon there emerged a streak of strange hue, which changed in another moment into a variegated line. The rising sun as scarlet as cinnabar seemed to be supported by a vibrating red glow, which was said to be issuing from the East Sea. Turning around, we saw that the peaks west of the arbour, whether lit by the sunlight or not, were tinged red, white or dappled, and looked as if they were bowing low.
West of the arbour was the Temple of the King of Mount Tai and the Temple of Princess Bixia. To the east of the latter was the palace of our Emperor. That day 1 saw some inscriptions carved on stones from the Xianqing period of the Tang Dynasty, and those of more ancient times were all obliterated. As for the stone tablets that stood out of the way, we had not time enough to go and appreciate them.
It was in the main a rocky mountain with little earth. The rocks, greenish black, were for the most part square, and round stones were quite scarce. Bushes were few and pines, grown out of the stone crevices, were many, having all leveled tops. Ice and snow prevailed and no waterfalls could
be seen, nor any traces of birds and beast. Within several li around Riguan Arbour no trees were visible, and snow was knee-deep
108
種梨
劉士聰
Planting a Pear Tree
A villager took his pears to the market to sell. His pears were juicy and sweet, but the price was high. A Taoist priest, in an old cap and worn cotton robe, came up to his cart and begged for a pear. The villager told him to go away but he would not. The villager got angry and began to use strong words at him. The Taoist priest said, "You've got a cartful of pears which must be in the hundred, but I am asking for only one of them and one pear is not much of a loss to you. Why arc you getting so angry about it?" The onlookers said, "Give him a bad one and let him go." A waiter in the tavern, hearing the noisy bickering in the street, came and bought a pear for the priest. The priest thanked him and said lo the crowd, "As a Taoist priest I am not that sparing. I've got first-class pears and I’d like to share them with you." Someone in the crowd said, "Why not eat your own pears then, since you've got some?"
"But I need the core of it as seed," the priest said and, holding up the pear with his hands, began to eat. When he ate up the pear, he held its core in one hand and, with the other, he took off a small shovel from his back. He began to dig in the ground a hole two or three inches deep, put the core in it and then covered it with earth. He asked if anyone in the crowd could find some hot water for him. One of them, an obliging person, fetched some boiling water from a shop by the street. The priest took it over and poured it where the core of the pear was buried.
While the people around watched, the core sprouted and grew and, in a moment, became a tree with exuberant foliage and, in another couple of seconds, it began to blossom and bear pears. The pears were big, emitting sweet fragrance and the tree was heavy with them. The priest picked them
109
and gave them to the people around and soon there were no more. Then the priest began to cut the tree and he worked at it for a long while before he felled it. He put the tree, leaves and all, on his shoulder and walked off at a leisurely pace.
While the priest was playing the magic the pear seller, standing among the crowd, craned his neck to watch, forgetting his own business. When the priest was gone he found that all his pears in the cart were gone. It was not until then that he realized the pears the priest had dished out were all his pears. And then he noticed that one shaft of his cart disappeared and the cut was fresh. The pear seller was bursting with anger. He dashed off to run after the priest. Turning the corner he found the lost shaft was lying at the foot of the wall. And by then he realized that it was the shaft of his cart, not the tree, that the priest was cutting. The priest was nowhere to be found and the whole marketplace was immensely amazed.

河中石獸
謝百魁
Stone Animals in the River
There was a temple in the south of Cangzhou Prefecture, located on the bank of a river. The gate of the temple collapsed and tumbled into the river, with the two stone animals sunken in the water. Some ten years afterwards, the monks solicited a sum of money, planning to restore the gate. They searched the river for the two stone animals, but lo no avail, thinking that they must have (lowed down the river. So they rowed a small boat, raking the river bed for them over a distance of ten-odd li, without finding a trace of them. A Confucian scholar teaching in the temple learned about it and said with a sneer, “You are not learned in physics They arc not wood, how can they be washed away be floods? Stone is solid and heavy while sand is loose and soft. They arc buried in the sand and sink deeper and deeper. Is it not ludicrous to search for them downstream?” Everybody was convinced and thought it a conclusive argument.
A veteran dyke-protection soldier heard this talk and also said with a sneer, “All stones fallen into the river must be looked for upstream. Because stone is solid and heavy while sand is loose and soft. Water cannot wash a stone away, but the force of its dashing against it can erode the sand and scoop a pit beneath it where it is exposed to the water, whose constant dashing and pounding keep it sinking deeper and deeper. When half of the stone is thus affected, it overturns into the sand pit. The water’s continuous scooping of the sand gives the stone one turn after another. Given the incessant overturning process, it is moved against the currents and travels up the river. To be sure, it is ludicrous to search for it downstream. But, is it not more so to look for it right on the river bed?" Acting upon his views, the stone animals were really found several li upstream. Similar cases in which one sees only one aspect and ignores other aspects of a phenomenon are too many to enumerate. Will it do to draw a conclusion from mere speculations?
111
虎丘記
Tiger Hillock
Yuan Hongdao
Tiger Hillock is about seven to eight li from the city. It has neither high cliffs nor deep gullies, but because it is near town, the music from pleasure-boats can be heard there every day. Moonlit nights, flowery mornings and snowy evenings attract endless streams of visitors to and fro, especially during the Mid-Autumn Festival.
On that day, every family in the city flocks there. All, from officials, young scholars and young ladies, down to shanty-dwellers, are decked out and dressed in their best. They spread several layers of mats along the highway and sit there feasting and drinking in crowded ranks all the way from the Thousand Men Rock to the gate of the monastery, their musical clappers piled up in heaps, their wine vessels like floating clouds. From a distance it seems that a flock of wild geese has alighted on a sandbank or rosy clouds have overspread a great river. The uproar and flashing colours defy description.
When the feasting starts, thousands of people begin to sing, their voices as indistinguishable as the droning of swarms of mosquitoes. Then they divide into groups and arrange a singing contest.
112
Their songs suit either refined or popular tastes and one can easily tell which are the best. Before long, only several dozens of singers arc left, wagging their heads and beating time with their feet. When the bright moon sails up the sky and the rocks gleam like silk, the rustic songs stop abruptly and only a few people continue singing. Then a man beats a pair of clappers slowly and sings lo the accompaniment of a flute and a piccolo. The clarion fluting and singing leave all listeners transported with joy. When the night is deep and slanting moonlight makes the flowers and trees cast chequered shadows on the water, the instruments are set aside and a solo is sung to which all present listen with bated breath. The singer's voice, fine as a thread, carries up to the skies, each word on a long-drawn-out note, inducing birds to hover above and moving heroes to tears.
Sword Spring is unfathomably deep, the cliffs soaring above it as if sliced by a sword. Cloud Garden is set off by the Heavenly Pool and other hills, where the cliffs and gullies rival each other in beauty; and this is the best place for a drinking party to enjoy the scenery. But after noon the sunlight is too strong for you to sit there for long.
Wenchang Pavilion is lovely too, its trees in the evening especially enchanting. To the north is the site of the old Pingyuan Hall, a vast open expanse with Yushan Mountain looming in the distance. The hall has long been derelict and Jiang Jinzhi and I had planned to have it repaired as a shrine for Wei Yingwu and Bai Juyi (1). But then I fell ill. Since I retired and returned home, perhaps Jinzhi has lost interest in this scheme. I believe that mountains and rivers have a time to flourish or to be left desolate.
I served as an official in Suzhou for two years and have climbed Tiger Hillock six limes. The last lime was with Jiang Jinzhi and Fang Zigong, and we enjoyed the moon on Monk Zhu Daosheng's Rock till late al night. On hearing that the magistrate had come, all the singers made themselves scarce. So I said lo Jinzhi, "Il's too bad, the overbearing conduct of officials and the vulgarity of the yamen runners! After my retirement I shall come back to enjoy the singing on this rock. The
moon may hear witness to this!" Now I've retired and come to settle in Suzhou. But I don't know if the moon over Tiger Hillock still remembers my pledge or not.
(l)Both these Tang-dynasty poets served as officials in Suzhou.
113
賣柑者言
楊憲益戴乃迭
The Orange Vendor
Liu Ji
A fruit vendor of Hangzhou was so skilled in storing oranges the whole year round that when he brought out his splendid wares, bright as gold and smooth as jade, people flocked to buy at ten times the market price. I purchased one myself, but to my amazement when I opened it something like smoke puffed into my mouth and nostrils, and I found the inside as shriveled as old cotton wadding.
“Are you selling these to be put in sacrificial vessels and offered to the spirits?” I demanded. “To be served to guests? Or just to impose on fools? This is a disgraceful swindle.”
“I have earned my living in this way for years,” the man replied with a smile. “And none of my customers has ever complained. Who are you, sir, to find fault? There are plenty of worse cheats in the world than me, I'd have you know! Those generals with tiger tallies seated on tiger skins look like magnificent defenders of the state but have they mastered military strategy? Those ministers with imposing headgear and belts look like dignified officers of the court, but can they really administer the state? They neither prevent revolts nor relieve the sufferings of the people, neither check corrupt officials nor rectify violations of the law. Instead they sit around wasting government grain without any sense of shame. True, they stay in lofty mansions, ride on big horses, feast on wine and meat and appear splendid and awe-inspiring, yet their fine gold and jade exteriors hold nothing but old cotton wadding. Why don't you investigate them instead of finding fault with my oranges?”
1 was silenced and had no answer. After leaving him, 1 thought over what he had said. He appeared to be a cynic like Dongfang Shuo (1), so disgusted with the abuses of our time that he
114
used his oranges to ridicule men.
(I)A famous jester in the second century B.C.

黃岡竹樓記
楊憲益戴乃迭
The Bamboo Pavilion in Huanggang (1)
Wang Yucheng
Huanggang abounds with bamboos. The bigger ones are as thick as rafters. Workers split the bamboo stems into two, chop off the joints and use them to substitute earthen tiles. Bamboo tiled houses are built everywhere, for they are inexpensive and labor-saving.
At the northwest corner of the outer city, the parapets have collapsed and wild grass grows profusely. Making use of the open space there, I have built a two-roomed bamboo pavilion, which adjoins the Moonlight Pavilion (2). It gives a panoramic view of the mountains in the distance and the shallow waler that flows over the sands. The tranquil beauty and the wide-extending space are so impressive that it is impossible to describe them in detail. The Bamboo Pavilion is an ideal place to listen to the torrential rain in summer, which sounds like waterfalls, and to the heavy snow in winter, for the snow sounds like tiny pieces of jade falling on the ground. It is also an ideal place to play the qin (3), for its tune is soft and melodious. The same is true of reciting poems, for the chanting carries an extremely graceful appeal. So are the games of chess playing and arrow throwing, for the former makes a “ding, ding” sound as the chess pieces touch the chessboard, and the latter makes a “zheng, zheng” sound as the thuds of the arrows drop into the pot. For all the pleasant sounds mentioned above, credit should be given to the bamboo pavilion. Every day in my leisure time after work I would put on a gown made of birds’ feathers (4) and a cap worn by the Taoist priest. With incense burning by my side and a copy of Yi Jing (The Book of Changes) in hand, I would sit in silence and forget all worldly affairs. Within my field of vision
besides the mountains and the river, there arc nothing but sailing boats, shorebirds, mists, clouds, and stands of bamboo. When I sober up, the fire lit for making tea has gone out. I send the setting sun off and welcome the bright moon. There is pleasure in being in exile! The Qiyun Pavilion (5) and the Luoxing Pavilion (6) were lofty indeed. The Jinghan Pavilion (7) and the Liqiao Pavilion (8) were grandiose indeed. But they were built to keep courtesans and dancers. Men of letters do not like them and I disdain them.
I have heard from workers that one layer of the bamboo tiles lasts ten years and two layers of the bamboo tiles last twenty years. Alas! I was demoted from the position of Hanlin (9) and exiled to Chu Zhou (10) in the first year of Zhidao (11). In the following year I was transferred to Guangling (12). In the third year I was appointed as a member of Xiye (13). On New Year’s Eve in the first year of Xianping (14)1 was assigned to be the prefectural governor of Huang Zhou (15). In the leap month of March in the following year I arrived at my post. In the past four years I moved non-stop from one place to another. I don’t know where I will be next year. Why should I worry about the Bamboo Pavilion? If my successors arc of the same mind as I, they will renovate it from time to time. Then the Bamboo Pavilion might survive.
(I )Huanggang is today’s Huanggang City in Hubei Province.
(2)The Moonlight Pavilion was another pavilion in Huanggang.
(3)Qin is a seven-stringed plucked instrument.
(4)A gown made of birds’ feathers was worn by the Taoist priest.
(5)The Qiyun Pavilion was a pavilion in today’s Suzhou, built by Han Pu in the Five Dynasties (907-960).
(6)The Luoxing Pavilion was a pavilion in today’s Nanjing, built by Sun Quan of the Kingdom of
Wu during the Period of the Three Kingdoms (220-280).
(7)The Jinghan Pavilion was a pavilion built by Emperor Wu of the Han Dynasty in Chang’an, the capital city.
(8)Thc Liqiao Pavilion was a pavilion built by Cao Cao of the Kingdom of Wei during the Period of the Three Kingdoms.
(9)Hanlin was a member of the imperial academy.
(10)Chu Zhou is a city in today’s Anhui Province.
(11 )Zhidao was the title of Emperor Taizong's reign of the Song Dynasty. The first year of Zhidao was 995 A.D.
(12)Guangling is today’s City of Yangzhou in Jiangsu Province.
(13)Xiye refers to Zhongshusheng, which was the highest administrative organization in the Northern Song Dynasty.
117
(14)Xianping was the title of Emperor Zhenzong’s reign of the song Dynasty. The first year of Xianping was the year of Wuxu according to the lunar calendar, that is, 998 A.D.
(15)Huangzhou, in today’s Huanggang in Hubei Province, was called Qi’an in the Tang Dynasty. 

羅經國
The Bamboo Pavilion at Huanggang
Wang Yucheng
The country of Huanggan abounds in bamboo, the largest as big as rafters. Bamboo workers split the stems and slice off the knots, and the bamboo is used in place of earthen tiles. All the buildings here are roofed with these bamboo tiles because they are cheap and save labour. At the northwest corner of my city the walls had crumbled, the ground was overgrown with brambles, the place wild and dirty; so I had a small two-room pavilion constructed there, linking it with the Moon Wave Pavilion. It affords a view of the distant hills and dips at the shallows of the river below. The quiet seclusion there defies description. This pavilion is delightful during a sudden summer shower, when rain beats on the roof like a waterfall; it is equally delightful during heavy snow in winter, when the snow tinkles on the roof like jade. The pavilion is a good place for strumming a lyre, for the echo is smooth and mellow. It is a good place for chanting poetry too, for the recitation rings out fine and clear; it is a good place for playing draughts and hearing the sound made by draughtsmen on the board, or for playing touhu and hearing the thud of arrows dropping into the pot; for all these sounds are brought out to the best advantage in this Bamboo Pavilion. In leisure moments after my official duties I put on a priestly gown and cap, take up the Book of Changes and sit there in silence with incense burning to banish mundane cases. So, beside the river and hills, 1 watch the sails in the wind, the birds on the sand, the mist and clouds, the bamboo and the trees; and when I recover from the effects of wine, when my tea stops bubbling on the
stove, I bid farewell to the setting sun and welcome the rising of the bright moon. Such are my pleasures in exile. Pavilions famed in history like the Cloud-Reaching Pavilion, the Fallen-Star Pavilion, the Well-Frame Pavilion and the Splendid Pavilion, may have been superbly imposing and magnificent, but they served solely to keep sing-song girls and dancers, hardly suited to a man of letters, and far from my way. The bamboo workers tell me that bamboo tiles can barely last ten years; while even if another layer is added, they last only twenty years. But I was sent to Chuzhou from the Imperial Academy in the first year of the reign of Zhidao; the following year I was transferred to Guangling, and the year after that posted back to the Chancellor's Office. The next year, on New Year's Eve, I was ordered to proceed to Huangzhou, and I arrived in this prefecture in the third intercalary month of the following year. So the last four years have seen my incessantly on the move, and I have no idea where I shall be next year. Why, then, should I worry
118
because this Bamboo Pavilion may not last? My one hope is that those come here after me will continue to keep it up, so that this pavilion may go on standing forever.

鴝鵒
The Story of a Myna
Pu Songling
Wang Fcnbin said that in his village there was a man who had a myna. He trained it to speak and they got attached to each other. Wherever he went he took it with him. They had been together for years.
When he was arriving at Jiangzhou one day, he found that he had run out of money. He was upset, not knowing what to do. The myna said, "Why not sell me? Take me to the perfect and you can sell me for a good price and traveling expenses will be no problem." The man said, "I can't bear to sell you." The myna said, "That's nothing. As soon as you get the money, get away from here quickly and wait for e under a big tree about twenty li west of town." The man took its advice. He went to town with the bird, engaging it in brief conversations. Soon they attracted many onlookers. The steward of the perfect saw the bird and told the prefect about it. The prefect summoned the man to his house and he wanted to buy the bird. The man said, "We depend on each other for survival. I cannot sell it to you." The prefect asked the bird, "Do you like to stay with me?" The bird answered, "Yes, I do." The prefect was delighted to hear it. Then the bird said again, "Give him ten liang of silver and no more." The prefect was all the more delighted. He gave the man ten liang of silver. The man left, with a feigned look of dejection.
The prefect asked the bird questions and the bird answered with great readiness. He ordered to give it meat to eat. The moment it finished the eat, the bird said, "1 want to take a bath." The prefect ordered to bring a gold basin, fill it with water, open the cage and let it bathe in it. When the bath was over, the bird flew up to the eave where it shook off the water and trimmed its plumage, in the meantime, chattering away with the prefect. In another moment its plumage was dried and the bird fluttered up, saying in the local accent, "I am going, sir." When they looked up
to see, the bird was out of sight. The prefect and his servants could do nothing but sigh toward the sky. When servants were sent to look for the birdman he was nowhere to be found. Later someone, traveling to Shaanxi, saw the man with his bird in Xi'an.
This story is told by Mr. Bi Zaiji

觀巴黎油畫記
謝百魁
Oil Paintings of Paris
Xue Fucheng
On the twenty fourth of the intercalary second month of the sixteenth year of the Guangxu period, I visited the Paris exhibition of wax models. They were all life-size and showed a speaking likeness of the men represented by them in terms of shape, manner, hair, skin, colour as well as height and stature. Celebrities, be they peers, ministers, artisans or people in other walks of life, often left their images, which, standing or reclining, sitting or bending over, laughing or crying, drinking or gambling, all struck one dumb with their vivid semblance to living persons.
I admired exceedingly such wonderful skill. But the interpreter said, "The Westerners' surpassing feat of art is none other than oil painting. Why not go to view the Franco-German War in the oil-painting gallery?"
The exhibition was arranged in a big rotunda, whose walls were hung with large oil paintings, with light shedding on them from the top windows. Standing in the room and glancing around, one can see castles, hills, knolls, brooks and woods all densely arrayed before his eyes. The men and horses of both armies, thrown into great confusion, are seen to be galloping, lying in ambush, rushing, chasing, shooting, firing cannons, bearing flags, hauling gun carriages and caissons, the whole panoramic scene shifting as continuously as a kaleidoscope. A shell explosion on the ground is soon followed by the flaring of fire and the permeating of smoke and flames. The hit objects become in a second mined walls and wrecked buildings or blackened houses and browned parapets... As for the soldiers lying prone and stiff, with their arms or legs broken and the ground
122
running red with their blood, the spectacle is simply too awful to view. However, looking up, one can see a bright moon slanting in the sky, half hidden in the clouds; looking down, one can perceive a plain caipeted with green grass and watered by a river, which looks so boundless that one may doubt whether he is actually in a room, and not on the battlefield.
I had heard that the French were much inclined to winning victories, and I wondered why they had portrayed so vividly their own defeat, making people downcast and dejected. The interpreter however told me, "This serves as a memento to their countrymen, so as to arouse their indignation and thoughts of revenge. " In that sense it had a profound significance.

柳敬亭傳
楊憲益戴乃迭
Account of Liu Jingling
Huang Zongxi
While I was reading Reminiscences of the Eastern Capital and Tales of the Old Capital (1), I came across records of several dozen story-tellers known for recounting histories and romances. Since then, their names have fallen into oblivion. Recently, however, Liu Jingling has been widely praised for his eloquence as a story-teller.
Liu JIngting was a son of the Cao family of Taizhou in Yangzhou Prefecture. Having a headstrong and fierce nature, he committed a capital offence at the age of fifteen. As a consequence, he changed his name and fled to Xuyi County to become a story-teller and was warmly received by his audiences. Later, he crossed the Yangtze River and travelled southwards. After attending one of his performances, Mo Houguang, a scholar from Songjiang Prefecture, commented, "This fellow is very smart and quick-witted indeed. He may well make a name for himself with his skill." He said to Liu. "Though story-telling is a rather unimportant job, it does require the teller to describe the disposition and feelings of his characters and to have an intimate knowledge of local
124
conditions and customs. If you can create characters that arc lifelike as those of the ancient actor Meng (2), then you will really have a successful career."
Liu returned home and devoted himself wholeheartedly to rehearsing so as to perfect his skill. A month later, he went to call on Mr Mo. The latter told him, "Your story-telling will delight audiences and make them explode with laughter."
After another month had gone hy, the scholar said, "Your story-telling will arouse the audience's emotions and move them to tears."
By the end of the third moth, Mr Mo exclaimed, "The joys and sorrows are expressed almost before you open your mouth. People will find it hard to restrain themselves. Now your skill is perfect."
Then Liu travelled to Yangzhou, Hangzhou and Nanjing, where he became very famous among the local gentry. He was always invited to entertain at large parties in luxurious homes or tell stories to gentlemen enjoying their leisure by exquisite pavilions, and was highly praised everywhere he went.
When Lord Zuo Liangyu led his troops south, the garrison commandant of Anhui Province wanted to curry favour with him so he offered Liu as a secretary. Zuo Liangyu was delighted and only regretted that he had not known the story-teller earlier. He made Liu participate in meetings to discuss military plans and the army officers and staff dared not treat the newcomer as a mere story-teller.
Zuo Liangyu was poorly educated and disliked the documents and letters written by his staff in flowery, elaborate language with numerous quotations from the classics. Liu Jingling used simple colloquialisms and familiar expressions heard in ordinary speech, and this perfectly suited the lord's taste. On one occasion Liu was sent by the lord as an envoy lo Nanjing (3). All of the court re of Zuo Liangyu, and welcomed the envoy with due respect and courtesy.
They badc him sit in the seat of honour and addressed him as General Liu, which the former story-teller accepted without showing the slightest discomfort. The ordinary townsfolk who had once been on familiar terms with Liu, whispered by the roadside when they saw him, "That fellow used to be our friend and a story-teller. Look at the wealth and rank he's got now!"
Before long the emperor in Beijing was overthrown by a peasant army and Lord Zuo Liangyu was killed. Liu Jingling lost almost everything he had and was reduced to poverty, so he had to return to the streets to resume his old trade. Since he had served in the army for quite a long time, he had seen many fierce and cunning criminals and fugitive murderers, witnessed national calamities and the vicissitudes of human life, and become familiar with dialects and customs all over the country. Now, whenever he uttered a sound, it was like the clash of swords or the galloping of cavalry, like
125
howling wind or weeping rain, mourning birds and frightened beasts, and roused the audience's remorse over their conquered nation, overshadowing any musical accompaniment. So great was his skill that no better assessment could be found than the remarks of Mr Mo.
(1)	The former, by Meng Yuanlao, is a ten-volume work recording local conditions, products and customs of the Northern Song capital of Kaifeng. The latter, written by Zhou Mi, is a ten-volume work containing similar information about the Southern Song capital of Hangzhou.
(2)	According to Records of the Historian, Meng was a native of the State of Chu that lived during the Spring and Autumn Period (770-476 BC). He once put on the late prime minister's clothes and imitated his actions to celebrate King Zhuang's birthday. Since he was the very image of the late chancellor, the king believed his former minister had come back to life.
(3)	Then the temporary capital, after Li Zicheng's insurrectionary army had conquered Beijing and overthrown the Ming empire.

卜來敦記
謝百魁
Brighton
Li Shuchang
Brighton, a coastal city of England and a famous sight of Europe, is situated some one hundred and sixty li to the south of London and can he reached by train in two hours. A resort of the English people, it leans against hills and confronts clear-cut cliffs. The rock is dug through for obtaining sufficient space to house large aquaria, which are supplied with spring water and furnished with glass. Fantastic creatures from the four continents are all collected here. A wooden bridge projecting over the sea for several thousand chi, with a pleasure pavilion at the end, enables tourists to admire a broad seascape. As for the rest of the city, one can see only mown lawns, even stretches of sands, and handsome houses with green screened windows, making up a single piece of emerald with the sea. The people, numbering one hundred thousand, live in rather great density. Streets and thoroughfares run in parallels and the urban area is being further expanded. The town does not command a view of boisterous waves and numerous mercantile ships and is free of the din of thriving workshops and factories, which would have made it vulgar and dusty. Thus its superiority lies namely in its tranquility and cleanliness.
After the prorogation of the annual parliament session, notable people all take rest here. On bright and sunny days when the hues of the sky merge with those of the sea, ladies and gentlemen are
127
seen sporting together, the jackets of these mixing with the shirts of those, creating a cloudy impression of magnificence. Now and then one or two yachts row in the ethereal sapphire-like waters, while some millionaires in splendid carriages or on swift steeds, racing shoulder to shoulder, enjoy a carefree drive or ride. In the twilight of dusk, lights shine in a brilliant array and music wafts over the water, echoing the sound of the wind and the tide. All this being so melancholy yet so grateful, one cannot help a feeling of world-forsaking loftiness.
One month after my arrival in London, I was accompanied by Ashbury, a wealthy squire, on a trip to Brighton, which I could not appreciate enough for its unique and surpassing scenic beauty. And I could never be tired of my repeated visits to it afterwards. Although I was dispatched to another country two years later and frequented many famous resorts, Brighton has always been kept in my memory. Such is its benign influence on human nature.
Great Britain as a nation can claim to be a world power. People often argue that it is merely because of her strong battleships, huge artillery and eager profiteering that she has achieved her ambition in the world. They have no idea that in this country there arc such wonderful scenes of leisure and ease. Formerly, Xunzi spoke of the difficulty of the consolidation of a state, and Luanzhen of Jin said to Zizhong of Chu, "The consolidation of a state comes from the unity of the people;" and added, "also comes from their living in peace and ease." Thus a powerful and consolidated state is inseparable from peace and ease among the people. In this sense Brighton serves us a window to look at other countries.


